title{{other uses}}
{{infobox UK place}}           
Aberdare ({{lang-cy}}) is an industrial town in Rhondda Cynon Taf, Wales, situated at the confluence of the Rivers Dare (Dâr) and Cynon.  The population at the (2001) census was 31,705.  It is {{convert}} south west of Merthyr Tydfil and {{convert}} north west of Cardiff.
HistoryFrom being, at the beginning of the 19th century, a mere village in an agricultural district, the place grew rapidly in population owing to the abundance of its coal and iron ore, and the population of the whole parish (which was only 1,486 in 1801) increased tenfold during the first half of the 19th century.{{1911}}  It has since declined, owing to the loss of most of the heavy industry.Ironworks were established at Llwydcoed and Abernant in 1799 and 1800 respectively, followed by others at Gadlys and Aberaman in 1827 and 1847. These have not been worked since about 1875. After this, the iron industry was represented only by a small tinplate works, but by this stage the economy of the town was dominated by the coal mining industry.  There were also several brickworks and breweries.  During the latter half of the 19th century, considerable public improvements were made to the town, which became, despite its neighbouring collieries, a pleasant place to live.  Its institutions included a post-graduate theological college (opened in connection with the Church of England in 1892, until 1907, when it was removed to Llandaff).

Aberdare, with the ecclesiastical parishes of St Fagan's (Trecynon) and Aberaman carved out of the ancient parish, had twelve Anglican churches, one Roman Catholic church (built in 1866 in Monk Street near the site of a cell attached to Penrhys Abbey) and at one time had over fifty Nonconformist chapels. The services in the majority of the chapels were in the Welsh language.  The urban district includes what were once the separate villages of Aberaman, Abernant, Cwmaman, Cwmbach, Cwmdare, Llwydcoed, Penywaun and Trecynon.  There are several cairns and the remains of a circular British encampment on the mountain between Aberdare and Merthyr. Hirwaun moor, 4 miles to the north west of Aberdare, was according to tradition the scene of a battle at which Rhys ap Tewdwr, prince of Dyfed, was defeated by the allied forces of the Norman Robert Fitzhamon and Iestyn ap Gwrgant, the last Welsh prince of Glamorgan.
The coal industry
In the early years of Aberdare's development, most of the coal worked in the parish was coking coal, and was consumed locally, chiefly in the ironworks. In 1836, exploitation of the "Four-foot Seam" of high-calorific value steam coal began, and pits were sunk in rapid succession.  This coal was valuable for steam railways and steam ships, and an export trade began, via the Taff Vale Railway and the port of Cardiff. The population of the parish rose from 6,471 in 1841 to 14,999 in 1851 and 32,299 in 1861 and John DaviesDavies, John, A History of Wales, Penguin, 1994, ISBN 0-14-014581-8, p 400 described it as "the most dynamic place in Wales". In 1851, the Admiralty decided to use Welsh steam coal in ships of the Royal Navy, and this decision boosted the reputation of Aberdare's product and launched a huge international export market.Davies, op cit, p 400 Coal mined in Aberdare parish rose from {{convert}} in 1844 to {{convert}} in 1850,Davies, op cit, p 384 and the coal trade, which after 1875 was the chief support of the town, soon reached huge dimensions.  Steam coal was subsequently found in the Rhondda and further west, but many of the great companies of the Welsh coal industry's Gilded Age started operation in Aberdare and the lower Cynon Valley, including those of Samuel Thomas, David Davies and Sons, Nixon's Navigation and Powell Duffryn. In common with the rest of the South Wales coalfield, Aberdare's coal industry commenced a long decline after World War I, and the last two deep mines still in operation in the 1960s were the small Aberaman and Fforchaman collieries, which closed in 1962 and 1965 respectively.On May 11, 1919, an extensive fire broke out on Cardiff Street, Aberdare.
Culture
Aberdare, during its boom years, was considered a centre of Welsh culture: it hosted the first National Eisteddfod in 1861, again in 1885, and in 1956 at Aberdare Park where the Gorsedd standing stones still exist.The Coliseum Theatre is Aberdare's main arts venue, containing a 600-seat auditorium and cinema. It is situated in nearby Trecynon and was built in 1938 using miners' subscriptions.  Aberdare was the birthplace of the Second World War poet Alun Lewis, and a plaque commemorating him is to be found, including a quotation from his poem, The Mountain over Aberdare.The original founding members of the rock band Stereophonics originated from the nearby village of Cwmaman.  It is also the hometown of guitarist Mark Parry of Vancouver rock band The Manvils.  Famed anarchist-punk band Crass played their last live show for striking miners in Aberdare during the UK miners' strike (1984-1985).Griffith Rhys Jones - or Caradog as he was commonly known - was the Conductor of the famous 'Côr Mawr' of some 460 voices (the South Wales Choral Union), which twice won first prize at Crystal Palace choral competitions in London in the 1870s.  He is depicted in the town's most prominent statue by sculptor Goscombe John, unveiled on Victoria Square in 1920.
Churches and chapels

In the town centre is St Elvan's Church. This is a Church in Wales church at the heart of the Parish of Aberdare. The church is over 200 years old and has had extensive work since its erection in the 1800s. The church also has a modern electrical, two-manual and pedal board pipe organ, that is still used in services.
The nearby St John the Baptist Church of the same parish is also notable as a 15th century building that is still used for regular services. Also of the same parish is St. Matthew's Church, Abernant.

In the Parish of Aberaman and Cwmaman is St. Margaret's Church, with an old, but beautiful, pipe organ with two manuals and a pedal board. Also in this parish is St. Joseph's church, Cwmaman. St. Joseph's has recently undergone much recreational work, almost converting the church into a community centre. However, regular church services still take place. Here, there is a two-manual and pedal board electric organ, with speakers at the front and sides of the church.There were many chapels in the area, most of which from the non-conformist era of Welsh religion; however, few of these are still used, and many have been converted or demolished. Notable perhaps are Saron Chapel and Siloa Chapel.Saron, located in Davis Street, Aberaman, was used for regular services by a small group of members until 2011, however, for many years, these were held in a small side-room, and not the chapel itself. The chapel has a large vestry comprising rows of two-way-facing wooden benches and a stage, with a side entrance onto Beddoe Street and back entrance to Lewis Street. Although the building is not in good repair, the interior of the chapel, including pulpit and balcony seating area (back & sides), are in good order. In February 1999, Saron was made a Grade II Listed Building.http://www.britishlistedbuildings.co.uk/wa-21368-saron-independent-chapel-aberamanSiloa has recently been 're-established' as a Welsh language chapel.Highland Place Unitarian Church celebrated its 150th anniversary in 2010http://www.ukunitarians.org.uk/aberdare/history.htm, with a number of lectures on its history and the history of Unitarianism in Wales taking place there. The church has a two-manual pipe organ with pedal board that is used to accompany most services. The connected schoolroom is used for post-service meetings and socialising.
Sports
Aberdare Athletic F.C. were members of the Football League between 1921 and 1927 before being replaced by Torquay United after finishing bottom. The club folded a year later. They played their games at the Aberdare Athletic Ground.Aberdare Rugby Football Club are a rugby union team formed in 1890 which still play in Aberdare today at the Ynys Stadium.The Aberdare Athletic Ground was also the venue of the first ever rugby league international played between Wales and the New Zealand All Golds on New Years Day 1908, which was won by the Welsh 9-8.
Transport
The town is served by Aberdare railway station and Aberdare bus station which are opposite each other in the town centre.
Schools and colleges
Colleges

Coleg Morgannwg


Primary schools

Caradog primary school
Town Church primary school
St Margarets Roman Catholic primary school
Ysgol Gynradd Gymraeg Aberdar
Blaengwawr Primary School
Oaklands Primary School
Cap Coach Primary School
Glynhafod Primary School
Cwmaman Infants School
Cwmdare Primary School
Aberdare Park Primary
Cwmbach Junior School


Secondary schools


Aberdare Girls' School
Aberdare High School
Blaengwawr Comprehensive School
St. John the Baptist School (Aberdare)
Ysgol Gyfun Rhydywaun


Notable people

See also Category:People from Aberdare

Notable current and former residents and natives of Aberdare include:

Henry Austin Bruce - 1st Baron Aberdare &#38; Home Secretary (1868–1873)
Stereophonics - All 3 original members, Kelly Jones, Richard Jones and Stuart Cable where all brought up in Cwmaman, Aberdare
Steph Davies-cricketer
Ioan Gruffudd - Actor born in Llwydcoed, Aberdare
Patrick Hannan (presenter) - Welsh broadcaster
Bethan Jenkins - Member of the National Assembly for Wales for the South Wales (West) Region
Mihangel Morgan - a leading Welsh language writer, born in Trecynon, some of his literary works feature Aberdare
Roy Noble - popular Welsh broadcaster has lived near Aberdare for the past thirty years
Jo Walton - fantasy novelist, now living in Montreal, Quebec
David Young - Rugby player and Cardiff Blues&#39; coach raised in Penywaun. Lions tourist and former Wales&#39; captain.
Lyn Evans - particle physicist and project leader of the Large Hadron Collider, the largest science experiment in the world.
John Morgan - A Canadian comedian best known for his roles on Royal Canadian Air Farce.


Twin cities/towns

{{flagicon}} - Montelimar, France
{{flagicon}} - Slagelse, Denmark
{{flagicon}} - Ravensburg, Baden-Württemberg, Germany


See also


Aberdare Park


References{{reflist}}
External links

BBC website on Aberdare
www.geograph.co.uk : photos of Aberdare and surrounding area

{{commons category}}{{Rhondda Cynon Taf}}bg:????????
cy:Aberdâr
da:Aberdare
de:Aberdare
es:Aberdare
eu:Aberdare
fr:Aberdare (pays de Galles)
gl:Aberdare - Aberdâr
id:Aberdare
it:Aberdare
lt:Aberderas
nl:Aberdare
no:Aberdare
pl:Aberdare
pt:Aberdare
ru:???????
sv:Aberdare