title
Activism consists of intentional efforts to bring about social, political, economic, or environmental change. Activism can take a wide range of forms from writing letters to newspapers or politicians, political campaigning, economic activism such as boycotts or preferentially patronizing businesses, rallies, street marches, strikes, sit-ins, and hunger strikes.Activists can function in roles as public officials, as in judicial activism. Arthur Schlesinger Jr. introduced the term "judicial activism" in a January 1947 Fortune magazine article titled "The Supreme Court: 1947."Keenan Kmiec in a 2004 California Law Review articleSome activists try to persuade people to change their behavior directly, rather than to persuade governments to change laws. The cooperative movement seeks to build new institutions which conform to cooperative principles, and generally does not lobby or protest politically.There is also a distinction to be made between Activists and Activism, as a huge amount of activism is carried out by people who would not label themselves as activists. It is crucial to recognise this, otherwise you fail to recognise the amount of activism being carried out and risk marginalising this type of social change as a specific form of activism i.e. as carried out by the activist. For example environmental activists' that align themselves with Earth First, or Road Protestors would commonly be labelled activists, whereas a local community fighting to stop their park or green being sold off, or built on would not be classed as activists, yet they are still effectively carrying out very similar actions. In short Activism is not always carried out by Activists. {{cite web}} 
See also

Community leader
Social movement
Virtual volunteering
Social engineering (political science)
Feminism
Restorationism
Advocacy group
Advocacy Evaluation


Types

Civil disobedience
Community building
Activism industry
Conflict transformation
Cooperative movement
Craftivism
Voluntary simplicity
Economic activism
Boycott
Vegetarianism (boycott of animal meat usage)
Veganism (boycott of animal usage)
Divestment (a.k.a. Disinvestment)
Franchise activism
Lobbying
Media activism
Culture jamming
Hacktivism
Internet activism
Nonviolence
Peace activist and Peace movement
Political campaigning
Propaganda
Guerrilla communication
Protest
Demonstration
Direct action
Theater for Social Change
Protest songs
Strike action
Youth activism
Student activism
Youth-led media


References{{reflist}}

Paul Rogat Loeb, Soul of a Citizen: Living With Conviction in a Cynical Time (St Martin's Press, 2010).  ISBN 978-0-312-59537-1.
Randy Shaw, The Activist's Handbook: A Primer for the 1990s and Beyond (University of California Press, 1996).  ISBN 0-520-20317-8.
David Walls, The Activist's Almanac: The Concerned Citizen's Guide to the Leading Advocacy Organizations in America (Simon &#38; Schuster/Fireside, 1993).  ISBN 0-671-74634-0.
Victor Gold, Liberwocky (Thomas Nelson, 2004). ISBN 978-0-7852-6057-8.



ar:????
bg:?????????
ca:Activisme
cs:Aktivismus
da:Aktivisme
de:Aktivist
el:??????????
es:Activismo
eu:Aktibismo
fa:????????
fr:Activisme politique
gl:Activismo
hr:Aktivizam
id:Aktivisme
it:Attivismo politico
he:????????
lt:Aktyvizmas
mk:?????????
nl:Politiek activisme
ja:??????
no:Aktivisme
pl:Aktywizm polityczny
pt:Ativismo
ro:Activism
ru:????????
simple:Activism
sr:?????????
sh:Aktivizam
fi:Aktivismi
sv:Aktivism
tr:Aktivizm
uk:????????