title{{automatic taxobox}}
The Actinopterygii ({{IPAc-en}}), or ray-finned fishes, constitute a class or sub-class of the bony fishes. The ray-finned fishes are so called because they possess lepidotrichia or "fin rays", their fins being webs of skin supported by bony or horny spines ("rays"), as opposed to the fleshy, lobed fins that characterize the class Sarcopterygii which also, however, possess lepidotrichia. These actinopterygian fin rays attach directly to the proximal or basal skeletal elements, the radials, which represent the link or connection between these fins and the internal skeleton (e.g., pelvic and pectoral girdles). In terms of numbers, actinopterygians are the dominant class of vertebrates, comprising nearly 96% of the 25,000 species of fish. They are ubiquitous throughout fresh water and marine environments from the deep sea to the highest mountain streams. Extant species can range in size from Paedocypris, at {{convert}}, to the massive Ocean Sunfish, at {{convert}}, and the long-bodied Oarfish, to at least {{convert}}.
Fossil record 
The earliest known fossil Actinopterygiian is Andreolepis hedei, dating back 420 million years (Late Silurian). This microvertebrate has been uncovered in Russia, Sweden, and Estonia.Palaeobase
ClassificationTraditionally three grades of actinopterygians have been recognised: the Chondrostei, Holostei, and Teleostei. Some morphological evidence suggests that the second is paraphyletic and should be abandoned; however, recent work based on more complete sampling of fossil taxa, and also an analysis of DNA sequence data from the complete mitochondrial genome, supports its recognition. Nearly all living bony fishes are teleosts.A listing of the different groups is given below, down to the level of orders, arranged in what has been suggested to represent the evolutionary sequence down to the level of order based primarily on the long history of morphological studies. This classification, like any other taxonomy based on phylogenetic research is in a state of flux. Recent morphological and molecular data has shown that several of these ordinal and higher-level groupings represent evolutionary grades rather than clades. Examples of demonstrably paraphyletic groups include the Paracanthopterygii, Scorpaeniformes, and Perciformes.{{cite web}} The listing follows FishBase{{cite web}} with notes when this differs from Nelson{{cite book}} and ITIS.{{ITIS}}

Subclass Chondrostei
Order Polypteriformes, including the bichirs and reedfishes In Nelson, Polypteriformes is placed in its own subclass Cladistia.
Order Acipenseriformes, including the sturgeons and paddlefishes
Subclass Neopterygii
Infraclass Holostei
Order Lepisosteiformes, the gars
Order Amiiformes, the bowfins
Infraclass Teleostei
Superorder Osteoglossomorpha
Order Osteoglossiformes, the bony-tongued fishes
Order Hiodontiformes, including the mooneye and goldeye
Superorder Elopomorpha
Order Elopiformes, including the ladyfishes and tarpon
Order Albuliformes, the bonefishes
Order Notacanthiformes, including the halosaurs and spiny eels
Order Anguilliformes, the true eels and gulpers
Order Saccopharyngiformes, including the gulper eel
Superorder Clupeomorpha
Order Clupeiformes, including herrings and anchovies
Superorder Ostariophysi
Order Gonorynchiformes, including the milkfishes
Order Cypriniformes, including barbs, carp, danios, goldfishes, loaches, minnows, rasboras
Order Characiformes, including characins, pencilfishes, hatchetfishes, piranhas, tetras, dourado / golden (genus Salminus) and pacu.
Order Gymnotiformes, including electric eels and knifefishes
Order Siluriformes, the catfishes
Superorder Protacanthopterygii
Order Argentiniformes, including the barreleyes and slickheads (formerly in Osmeriformes)
Order Salmoniformes, including salmon and trout
Order Esociformes the pike
Order Osmeriformes, including the smelts and galaxiids
Superorder Stenopterygii (may belong in Protacanthopterygii)
Order Ateleopodiformes, the jellynose fish
Order Stomiiformes, including the bristlemouths and marine hatchetfishes
Superorder Cyclosquamata (may belong in Protacanthopterygii)
Order Aulopiformes, including the Bombay duck and lancetfishes
Superorder Scopelomorpha
Order Myctophiformes, including the lanternfishes
Superorder Lampridiomorpha
Order Lampriformes, including the oarfish, opah and ribbonfishes
Superorder Polymyxiomorpha
Order Polymixiiformes, the beardfishes
Superorder Paracanthopterygii
Order Percopsiformes, including the cavefishes and trout-perches
Order Batrachoidiformes, the toadfishes
Order Lophiiformes, including the anglerfishes
Order Gadiformes, including cods
Order Ophidiiformes, including the pearlfishes
Superorder Acanthopterygii
Order Mugiliformes, the mullets
Order Atheriniformes, including silversides and rainbowfishes
Order Beloniformes, including the flyingfishes
Order Cetomimiformes, the whalefishes
Order Cyprinodontiformes, including livebearers, killifishes
Order Stephanoberyciformes, including the ridgeheads
Order Beryciformes, including the fangtooths and pineconefishes
Order Zeiformes, including the dories
Order Gobiesociformes, the clingfishesIn ITIS, Gobiesociformes is placed as the suborder Gobiesocoidei of the order Perciformes.
Order Gasterosteiformes including sticklebacks
Order Syngnathiformes, including the seahorses and pipefishesIn Nelson and ITIS, Syngnathiformes is placed as the suborder Syngnathoidei of the order Gasterosteiformes.
Order Synbranchiformes, including the swamp eels
Order Tetraodontiformes, including the filefishes and pufferfish
Order Pleuronectiformes, the flatfishes
Order Scorpaeniformes, including scorpionfishes and the sculpins
Order Perciformes 40% of all fish including anabantids, centrarchids (incl. bass and sunfish), cichlids, gobies, gouramis, mackerel, tuna, perches, scats, whiting, wrasses


Notes{{reflist}}
External links{{wikispecies}}
{{Commons category}}

{{eol}}
Actinopterygii at UntamedScience

{{Chordata}}
{{Actinopterygii}}
af:Actinopterygii
als:Strahlenflosser
ar:??????? ???????
az:?üaüzg?clil?r
bg:?????????
ca:Actinopterigi
cs:Paprskoploutví
da:Strålefinnede fisk
de:Strahlenflosser
et:Kiiruimsed
es:Actinopterygii
eo:Aktinopterigoj
eu:Aktinopterigio
fa:??????????
fr:Actinopterygii
ga:Actinopterygii
gl:Actinopterixios
ko:????
hr:Zrakoperke
id:Actinopterygii
is:Geisluggar
it:Actinopterygii
he:?????? ?????
ku:Masiyên perikên strîdar
la:Actinopterygii
lv:Starspures
lt:Stipinpelek?s žuvys
lij:Actinopterygii
hu:Sugarasúszójú halak
mk:??????????
nl:Straalvinnigen
ja:???
no:Strålefinnede fisker
nn:Strålefinnefisk
oc:Actinopterygii
pl:Promieniop?etwe
pt:Actinopterygii
rm:Actinopterygii
qu:Wach'i wayt'ana
ru:????????? ????
scn:Actinopterygii
simple:Actinopterygii
sk:Lú?oplutvovce
sl:Žarkoplavutarice
sr:??????????
sh:Klasifikacija košljoriba
fi:Viuhkaeväiset
sv:Strålfeniga fiskar
ta:?????????????????
to:Ika kaponga tala
tr:I??nsal yüzgeçliler
uk:???????????
vi:L?p Cá vây tia
diq:Maseyê ro?tperr?k?ni
zea:Straelvinnigen
zh:???