title{{Wiktionary}}
Ada, ADA, or A.D.A. may refer to:{{TOC right}}
People

St. Ada, a 7th-century French abbess
Ada, Countess of Atholl (died 1264)
Ada, Countess of Holland
Ada de Warenne, Countess of Northumbria and Huntingdon (died 1178)
Ada of Caria, satrap deposed by her brother Idrieus and restored by Alexander the Great
Ada, sister of Charlemagne, for whom the Ada Gospels at Trier were produced
Ada Lovelace, the &#34;first computer programmer&#34;
Ada (musician), stage name of electronic artist, DJ, and singer Michaela Dippel


Places

Ada, Croatia
Ada, Ghana
Ada (Ghana parliament constituency)
Ada (Serbia)
Ada County, Idaho, U.S.
Ada River, New Zealand
Ada Township (disambiguation)
Ada, Minnesota, U.S.
Ada, Ohio, U.S.
Ada, Oklahoma, U.S.
Ada, Michigan, U.S.


Television and film

Ada (film), a 1961 film by Daniel Mann
ADA...A Way of Life, a 2008 Bollywood musical by Tanvir Ahmed
Ada (dog actor), a dog that played Colin on the sitcom Spaced


Politics and government

Aeronautical Development Agency, an agency of India&#39;s Ministry of Defence
Air Defense Artillery Branch (United States Army)
Amazon Development Agency, a development agency in Brazil
American Decency Association, an American political organization advocating against pornography and &#34;indecent&#34; media
Americans for Democratic Action, an American liberal political advocacy organization
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, a U.S. law that prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability
Anti-Deficiency Act, a U.S. law that prohibits the federal government from incurring debts not authorized by Congress
Anti-Dumping Agreement, a General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) about anti-competitive dumping pricing practices
Assistant District Attorney
Austrian Development Agency, a development aid agency
Australian Digital Alliance, a copyright advocacy group


Air travel

Aerolínea de Antioquia, a Colombian Airline
Airline Deregulation Act, a 1978 US bill removing governmental control from commercial aviation
Adana ?akirpa?a Airport&#39;s IATA code


Computing

Ada (programming language), a programming language partially inspired by Pascal
Ada (computer virus)
Apple Design Awards


Medicine

American Dental Association
American Diabetes Association
American Dietetic Association
American Dyslexia Association


Enzymes

Adenosine deaminase, an enzyme involved in purine metabolism
Ada (protein), an enzyme induced by treatment of bacterial cells


Video games

Ada (Castlevania), a character in Castlevania: Legacy of Darkness
Ada Wong, a character in the Resident Evil franchise
ADA, a character in Zone of the Enders


Other uses

Ada (name), a feminine given name (and list of people with the name)
Ada (food), an Indian food made with rice, coconut powder mix, and sugar
Ada (orchid), a genus of orchids
Ada or Ardor: A Family Chronicle, a 1969 novel by Vladimir Nabokov
ADA collider, the first electron–positron collider
Adangme language&#39;s ISO 639-2 code
Advanced Distribution Automation, the extension of intelligent control over an electrical power grid
After the Development of Agriculture, A.D.A., a system of counting years, like A.D. and A.M.
Alternative Distribution Alliance, a music distributor owned by Warner Music Group
Amigos dos Amigos, a drug cartel in the favelas of Rio de Janeiro
Analog-to-digital converter/Digital-to-analog converter, seen as ADA or A/DA, a conversion occurring in some electronic devices, often musical
Association of Drainage Authorities, a membership body for those involved in water level management in the United Kingdom
Angehöriger der Armee, or AdA, a member of the Swiss Armed Forces


See also

Adah (disambiguation)
Adha (disambiguation)

{{disambig}}bs:Ada (?vor)
ca:Ada
da:Ada
de:ADA
et:Ada
es:Ada
eo:ADA
fr:Ada
gl:Ada
hr:Ada
id:Ada
it:ADA
he:???
lt:Ada (reikšm?s)
hu:Ada (egyértelm?sít? lap)
nl:Ada
ja:ADA
nn:Ada
pl:Ada
pt:ADA
ru:???
sr:???
sh:Ada
fi:Ada
sv:Ada
tr:Ada (anlam ayr?m?)
vi:Ada (??nh h??ng)
vo:Ada