title{{Use British English}}
{{Use dmy dates}}
{{redirect}}{{Infobox person}}
Augusta Ada King, Countess of Lovelace (10 December 1815&nbsp;– 27 November 1852), born Augusta Ada Byron, was an English writer chiefly known for her work on Charles Babbage's early mechanical general-purpose computer, the analytical engine. Her notes on the engine include what is recognised as the first algorithm intended to be processed by a machine; as such she is sometimes considered the "World's First Computer Programmer".J. Fuegi and J. Francis, "Lovelace & Babbage and the creation of the 1843 'notes'". IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 25 No.&nbsp;4 (October–December 2003): 16–26. Digital Object Identifier{{cite web}}She was the only legitimate child of the poet Lord Byron (with Anne Isabella Milbanke).  She had no relationship with her father, who died when she was nine. As a young adult she took an interest in mathematics, and in particular Babbage's work on the analytical engine. Between 1842 and 1843 she translated an article by Italian mathematician Luigi Menabrea on the engine, which she supplemented with a set of notes of her own. These notes contain what is considered the first computer program—that is, an algorithm encoded for processing by a machine. Though Babbage's engine has never been built, Lovelace's notes are important in the early history of computers. She also foresaw the capability of computers to go beyond mere calculating or number-crunching while others, including Babbage himself, focused only on these capabilities.Fuegi and Francis 2003 pp. 19, 25.
Biography
Ada Augusta Byron was born on 10 December 1815, the child of the poet Lord Byron, 6th Lord Byron and his wife, Anne Isabella "Annabella" Milbanke, Baroness Wentworth.Stein, Ada, p. 14 Byron, and many of those who knew Byron, expected that the baby would be "the glorious boy", and there was some disappointment at the contrary news.Turney 1972 p. 35 She was named after Byron's half-sister, Augusta Leigh, and was called "Ada" by Byron himself.Stein, Ada p. 17
On 16 January 1816, Annabella, at Byron's behest, left for her parents' home at Kirkby Mallory taking one-month-old Lovelace with her. Although English law gave fathers full custody of their children in cases of separation, Byron made no attempt to claim his parental rights.Stein, Ada, p. 16 On 21 April, Byron signed the Deed of Separation, although very reluctantly, and left England for good a few days later.Turney 1972 pp. 36–38 Byron did not have a relationship with his daughter and he died in 1824 when she was nine; her mother was the only significant parental figure in her life.Turney 1972 p. 138 Her mother, Annabella, became Baroness Wentworth in her own right in 1856, being then the sole remaining representative of the Wentworth Viscounts.Lovelace was often ill, dating from her early childhood. At the age of eight she experienced headaches that obscured her vision. In June 1829, she was paralysed after a bout of the measles. She was subjected to continuous bed rest for nearly a year, which may have extended her period of disability. By 1831 she was able to walk with crutches.Throughout her illnesses, Lovelace continued her education.Stein, Ada, pp. 28–30 Her mother's obsession with rooting out any of the insanity of which she accused Lord Byron was one of the reasons that Lovelace was taught mathematics from an early age. Lovelace was privately schooled in mathematics and science by William Frend, William King and Mary Somerville.{{cite book}} One of her later tutors was the noted mathematician and logician Augustus De Morgan. From 1832, when she was seventeen, her remarkable mathematical abilities began to emerge, and her interest in mathematics dominated her life even after her marriage. In a letter to Lovelace's mother, De Morgan suggested that Lovelace's skill in mathematics could lead her to become "an original mathematical investigator, perhaps of first-rate eminence".Stein, Ada, p. 82.Lovelace never met her younger half-sister, Allegra Byron, daughter of Lord Byron and Claire Clairmont, who died in 1822 at the age of five. She did, however, have some contact with Elizabeth Medora Leigh, the daughter of Byron's half-sister Augusta Leigh. Augusta Leigh purposely avoided Lovelace as much as possible when she was introduced at Court.Turney 1972 p. 155
Adult yearsLovelace knew Mary Somerville, noted researcher and scientific author of the 19th century, who introduced her to Charles Babbage on 5 June 1833. Other acquaintances were Sir David Brewster, Charles Wheatstone, Charles Dickens and Michael Faraday.By 1834, Lovelace was a regular at Court and started attending various events. She danced often and was able to charm many people and was described by most people as being dainty. However, John Hobhouse, Lord Byron's friend, was the exception and he described her as "a large, coarse-skinned young woman but with something of my friend's features, particularly the mouth".Turney 1972 pp. 138–139 This description followed their meeting on 24 February 1834 in which Lovelace made it clear to Hobhouse that she did not like him, probably due to the influence of her mother, which led her to dislike all of her father's friends. This first impression was not to last, and they later became friends.Turney 1972 p. 139On 8 July 1835 she married William King, 8th Baron King, later 1st Earl of Lovelace in 1838. Her full title for most of her married life was "The Right Honourable the Countess of Lovelace". Their residence was a large estate at Ockham Park, in Ockham, Surrey, along with another estate on Loch Torridon and a home in London.  They spent their honeymoon at Worthy Manor in Ashley Combe near Porlock Weir, Somerset.  The Manor had been built as a hunting lodge in 1799 and was improved by King in preparation for their honeymoon.  It later became their summer retreat and was further improved during this time.  The house was built on a small plateau in woodland overlooking the Bristol Channel and surrounded by terraced gardens in the Italian style.They had three children; Byron born 12 May 1836, Anne Isabella (called Annabella, later Lady Anne Blunt) born 22 September 1837 and Ralph Gordon born 2 July 1839. Immediately after the birth of Annabella, Lovelace experienced "a tedious and suffering illness, which took months to cure".In 1841, Lovelace and Medora Leigh (daughter of Lord Byron's half-sister Augusta Leigh) were told by Lovelace's mother that Byron, her father, was also Medora's father.Turney 1972 p. 159 On 27 February 1841, Lovelace wrote to her mother: "I am not in the least astonished. In fact you merely confirm what I have for years and years felt scarcely a doubt about, but should have considered it most improper in me to hint to you that I in any way suspected".Turney 1972 p. 160 Lovelace did not blame the incestuous relationship on Byron, but instead blamed Augusta Leigh: "I fear she is more inherently wicked than he ever was".Moore 1961 p. 431 This did not prevent Lovelace's mother from attempting to destroy her daughter's image of her father, but instead drove her to attack Byron's image with greater intensity.Turney 1972 p. 161
Charles BabbageAda Lovelace met and corresponded with Charles Babbage on many occasions, including socially and in relation to Babbage's Difference Engine and Analytical Engine. Babbage was impressed by Lovelace's intellect and writing skills. He called her "The Enchantress of Numbers". In 1843 he wrote of her:<poem>Forget this world and all its troubles and if
possible its multitudinous Charlatans&nbsp;– every thing
in short but the Enchantress of Numbers.Toole 1998, Acknowledgments.
</poem>
{{anchor}}During a nine-month period in 1842–43, Lovelace translated Italian mathematician Luigi Menabrea's memoir on Babbage's newest proposed machine, the Analytical Engine. With the article, she appended a set of notes.Menabrea 1843. The notes are longer than the memoir itself and include (Section G), in complete detail, a method for calculating a sequence of Bernoulli numbers with the Engine, which would have run correctly had the Analytical Engine been built. Based on this work, Lovelace is now widely credited with being the first computer programmer and her method is recognised as the world's first computer program.Gleick, J. (2011), The Information: a History, a Theory, a Flood, London, Fourth Estate, pp116–118Part of the terrace at Worthy Manor was known as "Philosophers Walk", as it was there that Lovelace and Babbage were reputed to have walked discussing mathematical principles.  In 1939 the house was let to Dr Barnardos housing child evacuees from cities, including Bristol, during World War II.   After a brief spell as a country club in the early 1950s it fell into disrepair and was demolished in 1974.  Parts of the gardens, though severely overgrown, are visible from the footpath from Porlock Weir to Culbone.  The village computer centre in the nearby village of Porlock is named after Lovelace.Some biographers debate the extent of her original contributions. Dorothy Stein, author of Ada: A Life and a Legacy, contends that the programs were mostly written by Babbage himself.Stein, Ada, pp. 92–110. Babbage wrote the following on the subject, in his Passages from the Life of a Philosopher (1864).{{cite book}}{{quote}}The level of impact of Lovelace on Babbage's engines is difficult to resolve from Babbage's writings due to Babbage's tendency not to acknowledge (either orally or in writing) the influence of other people in his work.{{Citation needed}}
DeathLovelace died at the age of thirty-six, on 27 November 1852,GRO Register of Deaths: December 1852 1a * MARYLEBONE&nbsp;– Augusta Ada Lovelace from uterine cancer and bloodletting by her physicians.Baum 1986 pp. 99–100 She was buried, at her request, next to her father at the Church of St. Mary Magdalene in Hucknall, Nottingham.
First computer program
In 1842 Charles Babbage was invited to give a seminar at the University of Turin about his analytical engine. Luigi Menabrea, a young Italian engineer, and future prime minister of Italy, wrote up Babbage's lecture in French, and this transcript was subsequently published in the Bibliothèque Universelle de Genève in October 1842.Babbage asked the Countess of Lovelace to translate Menabrea's paper into English, subsequently requesting that she augment the notes she had added to the translation. Lady Lovelace spent most of a year doing this. These notes, which are more extensive than Menabrea's paper, were then published in The Ladies' Diary and Taylor's Scientific Memoirs under the initialism "AAL".In 1953, over one hundred years after her death, Lady Lovelace's notes on Babbage's Analytical Engine were republished. The engine has now been recognised as an early model for a computer and Lady Lovelace's notes as a description of a computer and software.{{Cite document}}.Her notes were labelled alphabetically from A to G. In note G, the Countess describes an algorithm for the analytical engine to compute Bernoulli numbers. It is considered the first algorithm ever specifically tailored for implementation on a computer, and for this reason she is often cited as the first computer programmer.http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/shortsharpscience/2009/03/ada-lovelace-day.html However the engine was never actually constructed to completion during Lovelace's lifetime.The computer language Ada, created on behalf of the United States Department of Defense, was named after Lovelace. The reference manual for the language was approved on 10 December 1980, and the Department of Defense Military Standard for the language, "MIL-STD-1815", was given the number of the year of her birth. Since 1998, the British Computer Society has awarded a medal in her name{{Cite document}}. and in 2008 initiated an annual competition for women students of computer science.{{Cite document}}.
Modern references
Lady Lovelace has been portrayed in the film Conceiving Ada, the steam punk novel The Difference Engine, by William Gibson and Bruce Sterling and the webcomic 2D GogglesThe Thrilling Adventures of Lovelace and BabbageExperiments in Comics with Sydney Padua by Sydney Padua.  Ada Lovelace Day is an organization whose goal is to "raise the profile of women in science, technology, engineering and maths".
Commemoration
In the UK, the annual conference for women undergraduates is named after Ada Lovelace (the BCSWomen Lovelace Colloquium). This moves around; in 2008 and 2009 it was in Leeds, 2010 in Cardiff, and 2011 in Birmingham. 2012 will be in Bath{{cite web}}.In 2009 and 2010, 24 March was commemorated by some as Ada Lovelace Day, a day to celebrate the achievements of women in technology and science. The 2011 Ada Lovelace Day was on 7 October.{{cite web}}
Titles and styles

10 December 1815 – 8 July 1835: The Honourable Ada Augusta Byron
8 July 1835–1838: The Right Honourable the Lady King
1838 – 27 November 1852: The Right Honourable the Countess of Lovelace


Publications

Sketch of the Analytical Engine Invented by Charles Babbage, Esq. with notes by trans. Ada Lovelace, in Scientific Memoirs, Vol 3 (1842)


See also{{Portal}}

Women in computing
{{Clear}}
Notes{{Reflist}}
References{{Refbegin}}

Baum, Joan. The Calculating Passion of Ada Byron. Archon Books, 1986. ISBN 0-208-02119-1
Fuegi, J. and Francis, J. &#34;Lovelace &#38; Babbage and the creation of the 1843 &#39;notes&#39;&#34;. IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 25 No. 4 (October–December 2003): Digital Object Identifier
Kim, Eugene and Toole, Betty Alexandra T, &#34;Ada and the First Computer&#34;, Scientific American, May 1999
{{cite journal}} With notes upon the Memoir by the Translator
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
Toole, Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D, Ada, the Enchantress of Numbers, A Selection from the Letters of Ada Lovelace, and her Description of the First Computer (1992)
Toole, Betty Alexandra Toole Ed.D., Ada, The Enchantress of Numbers: Poetical Science, 2010
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{Refend}}
External links{{Commons}}

Ada Lovelace: Founder of Scientific Computing (SDSC Women in Science)
"Ada Byron, Lady Lovelace", Biographies of Women Mathematicians, Agnes Scott College
{{MacTutor Biography}}
Ada Lovelace & The Analytical Engine
Ada & the Analytical Engine
Ada Lovelace, Countess of Controversy (g4tv.com)
"Repurposing Ada" at Salon.com
BBC Radio 4 &ndash; In Our Time &ndash; Ada Lovelace – streaming audio
Biography of Ada Lovelace at L'Oreal: Women in Science
Sketch of The Analytical Engine Invented by Charles Babbage by L. F. Menabrea with notes upon the Memoir by the translator Ada Augusta, Countess of Lovelace
Ada Lovelace's Notes and The Ladies Diary

{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Lovelace, Ada King, Countess Of}}
























ar:??? ???????
bn:?????? ??????
zh-min-nan:Ada Lovelace
bs:Ada Lovelace
bg:??? ???????
ca:Ada Lovelace
cs:Ada Lovelace
da:Ada Lovelace
de:Ada Lovelace
et:Ada Lovelace
el:???? ???????
es:Ada Lovelace
eu:Ada Lovelace
fa:???? ??????
fr:Ada Lovelace
ga:Ada Lovelace
gv:Ada Lovelace
gl:Ada Augusta Lovelace
ko:??? ?????
hy:??? ???????
hr:Ada Lovelace
id:Ada Lovelace
is:Ada Lovelace
it:Ada Lovelace
he:??? ???????
ht:Ada Lovelace
la:Ada Lovelace
lb:Ada Lovelace
lt:Ada Lovelace
hu:Ada Lovelace
ml:?? ????????
mt:Ada Lovelace
nl:Ada Lovelace
ja:????????
no:Ada Byron Lovelace
oc:Ada Lovelace
pms:Ada Byron King
pl:Ada Lovelace
pt:Ada Lovelace
ro:Ada Lovelace
ru:???????, ???
simple:Ada Lovelace
sk:Augusta Ada Kingová
sr:???? ???? ???????
fi:Ada Lovelace
sv:Ada Lovelace
th:???? ?????
tg:??? ???????
tr:Ada Lovelace
uk:??? ???????
vi:Ada Lovelace
yo:Ada Lovelace
zh:??·????