title{{Refimprove}}
{{Infobox saint}}
This article is about St Adalbert of Prague.  For other uses, see Adalbert (disambiguation).Saint Adalbert, Czech: {{Audio}}; {{lang-pl}}, (c. 956 &ndash; April 23, 997), Czech Roman Catholic saint, a Bishop of Prague and a missionary, was martyred in his efforts to convert the Baltic Prussians. He evangelized Poles and Hungarians. St. Vojt?ch was later made the patron saint of Bohemia, Poland, Hungary and Prussia.
Birth and youthAdalbert (Vojt?ch, Vja?eslav) was born into a noble Czech family of Prince Slavník and his wife St?ezislava in Libice nad Cidlinou, Bohemia. The Chambers Biographical Dictionary mistakenly gives his year of birth as 939.Chambers Biographical Dictionary, ISBN 0-550-16010-8, p.7  His father was a rich and independent ruler of the Zli?an princedom that rivaled Prague (see Slavník's dynasty). Adalbert had five full brothers: Sob?slav (Slavnik's heir), Spytimír, Pobraslav, Po?ej, ?áslav and a half-brother Radim (Gaudentius) from his father's liaison with another woman. Radim chose a clerical career as did Adalbert, and took the name Gaudentius. Adalbert was a well-educated man, having studied for about ten years (970-80) in Magdeburg under Saint Adalbert of Magdeburg. Upon the death of his mentor, he took the name Adalbert. Gifted and industrious, Adalbert soon became well-known all over Europe.
Religious actsIn 980 Adalbert finished his studies at Magdeburg school and returned to Prague, where he became a priest. In 981 his father, Prince Slavnik, and both his mentors died. In 982, still not yet thirty years old, Adalbert became the Bishop of Prague. Although Adalbert descended from a rich family and could afford comfort and luxury, he lived poorly of his own free will. He was noted for charity, austerity, and zealous service to the Church. His duty was difficult even in baptized Bohemia, as the pagan creed was deeply embedded in the peoples' minds. Adalbert complained of polygamy and idolatry, which still were not unusual among the Czechs.  He also strongly resented the participation of baptized Christians in the slave trade.In 989 he resigned from his bishop's cloth and left Prague. He went to Rome and lived as a hermit in St. Alexis Benedictine monastery.Four years later, in 993, Pope John XV sent him back to Bohemia. Adalbert became the Bishop again. That time he founded a monastery in B?evnov, near Prague, the first one in the Czech lands. Nonetheless, the nobility there continued to oppose his ministry. Also, according to Cosmas' chronicle, high clerical office was a burden to Adalbert, and in 994 he offered it to Strachkvas who was P?emyslid and Duke Boleslav's brother. Strachkvas, nevertheless, refused.In 995 Slavniks' former rivalry with the P?emyslids (allied with Vršovci) resulted in the storming of Libice led by Boleslaus II the Pious. During the struggle four (or five) of Adalbert's brothers were murdered. Thus the Zli?an princedom became part of the P?emyslids' estate.Adalbert damned the murderers{{Citation needed}}(Vršovci) in church and, according to the legend, predicted that Vršovci would be severely persecuted. After the tragedy he could not stay in Bohemia and escaped from Prague, despite the Pope's call for him to return to his episcopal see. Strachkvas was eventually appointed to be his successor. However, when he was going to assume the Bishop office in Prague, he suddenly died during the ceremony itself. Circumstances of his death are still unclear.As for Adalbert, he went to Hungary and baptized Géza of Hungary and his son Stephen in the city of Esztergom. Then he went to Poland where he was cordially welcomed by Boles?aw I the Brave. After the short visit Adalbert went to Prussia with a Christian mission.
Mission and martyrdom in PrussiaAdalbert of Prague had already in 977 entertained the idea of becoming a missionary in Prussia. After he had converted Hungary, he was sent by the Pope to convert the heathen Prussians.  Boleslaus the Brave, duke of Poland (later king), sent soldiers with Adalbert. The bishop and his followers - including his half-brother Radim (Gaudentius) - entered Prussian territory and went along the Baltic Sea coast to Gda?sk.It was a standard procedure of Christian missionaries to try to chop down sacred oak trees, which they had done in many other places, including Saxony. Because the trees were worshipped and the spirits who were believed to inhabit the trees were feared for their powers, this was done to demonstrate to the non-Christians that no supernatural powers protected the trees from the Christians. (See: Iconoclasm)When they did not heed warnings to stay away from the sacred oak groves, Adalbert was martyred in April 997 on the Baltic Sea coast east of Truso (currently Elbl?g, Elbing), or near Tenkitten and Fischhausen (see external link map St. Albrecht) It is recorded that his body was bought back for its weight in gold by Boleslaus the Brave.
Canonization and memory

A few years later Adalbert was canonized as Saint Adalbert of Prague. His life has been written about in Vita Sancti Adalberti Pragensis by various writers, the earliest being traced to imperial Aachen and Liège/Lüttich's bishop Notger von Lüttich, although it was assumed for many years that the Roman monk John Canaparius wrote the first Vita in 999. Another famous biographer of Adalbert was Saint Bruno of Querfurt who wrote his hagiography in 1001–1004.Notably, Bohemian rulers (i.e., P?emyslids) initially refused to ransom Saint Adalbert's body from the Prussians who murdered him, so it was purchased by Poles. This fact may be explained by Saint Adalbert's belonging to the Slavniks family; it highlights the strength of the two clans' conflict. Thus Saint Adalbert's bones were stored in Gniezno and helped Boleslaus the Brave to improve Poland's position in Europe.According to Bohemian accounts, in 1039 the Bohemian duke B?etislav I looted the bones of Saint Adalbert from Gniezno in a raid and moved them to Prague.  According to Polish accounts he took the wrong relics, those of St Gaudensius, while Saint Adalbert's relics were hidden by the Poles and remain in Gniezo. In 1127 the decapitated head, which was not in the original purchase (according to Roczniki Polskie) was found and moved to Gniezno. In 1928, one of the arms of Saint Adalbert, which Boles?aw I had given to Otto III in the year 1000, was added to the bones preserved in Gniezno. Today Saint Adalbert has two elaborate shrines claiming to contain his remains, in the cathedrals of Prague and Gniezno, and which bones are authentic is not clear. For example, the saint has two skulls - one in Prague, a second in Gniezno (stolen in 1923).The massive bronze Gniezno Doors of Gniezno Cathedral, of about 1175, are decorated with 18 reliefs of scenes from the saint's life, the only Romanesque church doors in Europe to contain a cycle illustrating the life of a saint.April 1997 was the thousandth anniversary of Saint Adalbert's martyrdom. It was commemorated in the Czech Republic, Poland, Germany, Russia and other countries. Representatives of Catholic, Greek Orthodox, and Evangelical churches pilgrimaged to Gniezno, to the saint's tomb. John Paul II visited Gniezno and held a ceremonial divine service in which heads of seven European states and about a million believers took part.In Kaliningrad Oblast, near Beregovoe village (former Tenkitten), where Adalbert's death hypothetically took place, a ten-meter cross was established.
See also{{Portal box}}

History of the Czech lands in the Middle Ages
History of Poland (966–1385)
Congress of Gniezno
Gniezno Doors
Vojtech


References{{Reflist}}

Attwater, Donald and Catherine Rachel John. The Penguin Dictionary of Saints. 3rd edition. New York: Penguin Books, 1993. ISBN 0-14-051312-4.


External links

{{CathEncy}}
Map of Prussia from c 1660 with St. Albrecht location between Tenkitten and Fischhausen, west of Königsberg.

{{National symbols of Poland}}{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Adalbert Of Prague}}


















be:????????? ???????
ca:Adalbert de Praga
cs:Svatý Vojt?ch
de:Adalbert von Prag
es:Adalberto de Praga
eo:Adalberto el Prago
fr:Adalbert de Prague
gl:Adalberto de Praga
hr:Sveti Vojtjeh
id:Adelbertus
it:Adalberto di Praga
csb:Swiãti Wòjcech
sw:Adalbert wa Prague
la:Adalbertus (episcopus Pragensis)
lv:Sv?tais Adalberts no Pr?gas
lt:Adalbertas Prahiškis
hu:Szent Adalbert
nl:Adalbert van Praag
ja:??????????
pl:?wi?ty Wojciech
pt:Adalberto de Praga
ru:????????? ????????
sk:Svätý Vojtech
sl:Sveti Adalbert Praški
fi:Adalbert
sv:Vojt?ch Adalbert av Prag
tl:Adalberto ng Prague
uk:????????? ????????
zh:???????