title{{Infobox philosopher}}
Johann Adam Weishaupt (6 February 1748 in Ingolstadt&nbsp;– 18 November 1830Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie Vol. 41, p. 539.Engel, Leopold. Geschichte des Illuminaten-ordens. Berlin: H. Bermühler Verlag, 1906.van Dülmen, Richard. Der Geheimbund der Illuminaten. Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 1975.Stauffer, Vernon. New England and the Bavarian Illuminati. Columbia University, 1918. in Gotha) was a German philosopher and founder of the Order of Illuminati, a secret society with origins in Bavaria.
Early lifeAdam Weishaupt was born on 6 February 1748 in IngolstadtEngel 22. in the Electorate of Bavaria. Weishaupt's father Johann Georg Weishaupt (1717–1753) died when Adam was five years old. After his father's death he came under the tutelage of his godfather Johann Adam Freiherr von IckstattAllgemeine Deutsche Biographie Vol. 13, pp. 740–741. who, like his father, was a professor of law at the University of Ingolstadt.Freninger, Franz Xaver, ed. Das Matrikelbuch der Universitaet Ingolstadt-Landshut-München. München: A. Eichleiter, 1872. 31. Ickstatt was a proponent of the philosophy of Christian Wolff and of the Enlightenment,Hartmann, Peter Claus. Bayerns Weg in die Gegenwart. Regensburg: Pustet, 1989. 262. Also, Bauerreiss, Romuald. Kirchengeschichte Bayerns. Vol. 7. St. Ottilien: EOS Verlag, 1970. 405. and he influenced the young Weishaupt with his rationalism. Weishaupt began his formal education at age seven at a Jesuit school. He later enrolled at the University of Ingolstadt and graduated in 1768Freninger 47. at age 20 with a doctorate of law.Engel 25–28. In 1772Freninger 32. he became a professor of law. The following year he married Afra SausenhoferEngel 31. of Eichstätt.After Pope Clement XIV’s suppression of the Society of Jesus in 1773, Weishaupt became a professor of canon law,Engel 33. Also, Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie Vol. 41, p. 540. a position that was held exclusively by the Jesuits until that time. In 1775 Weishaupt was introducedEngel 61–62. to the empirical philosophy of Johann Georg Heinrich FederAllgemeine Deutsche Biographie Vol. 6, pp. 595–597. of the University of Göttingen. Both Feder and Weishaupt would later become opponents of Kantian idealism.Beiser, Frederick C. The Fate of Reason. Harvard University Press, 1987. 186–88.
Founder of the Illuminati{{quote}}On 1 May 1776 Weishaupt formed the "Order of Perfectibilists". He adopted the name of "Brother Spartacus" within the order. Though the Order was not egalitarian or democratic, its mission was the abolition of all monarchical governments and state religions in Europe and its colonies.Catholic Encyclopedia: Illuminati, sourcing Illuminati papersThe actual character of the society was an elaborate network of spies and counter-spies. Each isolated cell of initiates reported to a superior, whom they did not know, a party structure that was effectively adopted by some later groups.Weishaupt was initiated into the Masonic Lodge "Theodor zum guten Rath", at Munich in 1777. His project of "illumination, enlightening the understanding by the sun of reason, which will dispel the clouds of superstition and of prejudice" was an unwelcome reform. Soon however he had developed gnostic mysteries of his own, with the goal of "perfecting human" nature through re-education to achieve a communal state with nature, freed of government and organized religion. He began working towards incorporating his system of Illuminism with that of Freemasonry.He wrote: "I did not bring Deism into Bavaria more than into Rome. I found it here, in great vigour, more abounding than in any of the neighboring Protestant States. I am proud to be known to the world as the founder of the Illuminati."{{citation needed}}Weishaupt's radical rationalism and vocabulary was not likely to succeed. Writings that were intercepted in 1784 were interpreted as seditious, and the Society was banned by the government of Karl Theodor, Elector of Bavaria, in 1784. Weishaupt lost his position at the University of Ingolstadt and fled Bavaria.
Activities in exileHe received the assistance of Duke Ernest II of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg (1745–1804), and lived in Gotha writing a series of works on illuminism, including A Complete History of the Persecutions of the Illuminati in Bavaria (1785), A Picture of Illuminism (1786), An Apology for the Illuminati (1786), and An Improved System of Illuminism (1787). Adam Weishaupt died in Gotha on 18 November 1830. He was survived by his second wife, Anna Maria (née Sausenhofer), and his children Nanette, Charlotte, Ernst, Karl, Eduard, and Alfred. Weishaupt was buried next to his son Wilhelm who preceded him in death in 1802.
Contemporary opinion{{main}}
John Robison, a professor of natural philosophy at Edinburgh University in Scotland and a member of a Freemason Lodge there, said he had been asked to join the Illuminati. After consideration he concluded that the Illuminati were not for him. In 1798 he published a book called Proofs of a Conspiracy in which he wrote: "An association has been formed for the express purposes of rooting out all the religious establishments and overturning all existing governments ... the leaders would rule the World with uncontrollable power, while all the rest would be employed as tools of the ambition of their unknown superiors." This book was sent to George Washington, who replied:

It was not my intention to doubt that, the Doctrines of the Illuminati, and principles of Jacobinism had not spread in the United States. On the contrary, no one is more truly satisfied of this fact than I am. The idea that I meant to convey, was, that I did not believe that the Lodges of Free Masons in this Country had, as Societies, endeavoured to propagate the diabolical tenets of the first, or pernicious principles of the latter (if they are susceptible of separation).George Washington – Letter to the Reverend G. W. Snyder (24 October 1798)LOC photocopy, George Washington Letter to the Rev. G.W. Snyder, 24 October 1798


Quotes about Weishaupt{{quote}}{{quote}}
References in pop cultureAdam Weishaupt is referred to repeatedly in The Illuminatus! Trilogy, written by Robert Shea and Robert Anton Wilson, as the founder of the Bavarian Illuminati and as an imposter who killed George Washington and took his place as the first president of the United States. Washington's portrait on the U.S. one-dollar bill is said to actually be Weishaupt's.Another version of Adam Weishaupt appears in the extensive comic book novel Cerebus the Aardvark by Dave Sim, as a combination of Weishaupt and George Washington. He appears primarily in the Cerebus and Church & State I volumes. His motives are republican confederalizing of city-states in Estarcion (a pseudo-Europe) and the accumulation of capital unencumbered by government or church.Weishaupt is also mentioned among the mish-mash of complicated conspiracies in the PC game Deus Ex. During JC Denton's escape from Versalife labs in Hong Kong, he recovers a virus engineered with the molecular structure in multiples of 17 and 23. Tracer Tong notes "1723... the birthdate of Adam Weishaupt" Weishaupt was in fact born in 1748. However 1723 was the year that Weishaupt's freemasonry lodge, "Theodor zum guten Rath", was founded.Adam Weishaupt is also mentioned ("Bush got a ouija to talk to Adam Weishaupt") by the New York rapper Cage in El-P's "Accidents Don't Happen", the ninth track on his album Fantastic Damage (2002).
Works
On the Illuminati

(1786) Apologie der Illuminaten.
(1786) Vollständige Geschichte der Verfolgung der Illuminaten in Bayern.
(1786) Schilderung der Illuminaten.
(1787) Einleitung zu meiner Apologie.
(1787) [Einige Originalschriften des Illuminatenordens...]
(1787) [Nachtrage von weitern Originalschriften...] Google Books
(1787) Kurze Rechtfertigung meiner Absichten.
(1787) Nachtrag zur Rechtfertigung meiner Absichten.
(1787) Apologie des Mißvergnügens und des Übels.
(1787) Das Verbesserte System der Illuminaten.
(1788) Der ächte Illuminat, oder die wahren, unverbesserten Rituale der Illuminaten.
(1795) Pythagoras, oder Betrachtungen über die geheime Welt- und Regierungskunst.


Philosophical works

(1775) De Lapsu Academiarum Commentatio Politica.
(1786) Über die Schrecken des Todes&nbsp;– eine philosophische Rede.
{{fr icon}} Discours Philosophique sur les Frayeurs de la Mort (1788). Gallica
(1786) Über Materialismus und Idealismus. Torino
(1788) Geschichte der Vervollkommnung des menschlichen Geschlechts.
(1788) Über die Gründe und Gewißheit der Menschlichen Erkenntniß.
(1788) Über die Kantischen Anschauungen und Erscheinungen.
(1788) Zweifel über die Kantischen Begriffe von Zeit und Raum.
(1793) Über Wahrheit und sittliche Vollkommenheit.
(1794) Über die Lehre von den Gründen und Ursachen aller Dinge.
(1794) Über die Selbsterkenntnis, ihre Hindernisse und Vorteile.
(1797) Über die Zwecke oder Finalursachen.
(1802) Über die Hindernisse der baierischen Industrie und Bevölkerung.
(1804) Die Leuchte des Diogenes.
{{en icon}} Diogenes Lamp (Tr. Amelia Gill) introduced by Sir Mark Bruback chosen by the Masonic Book Club to be its published work for 2008. (Ed. Andrew Swanlund).
(1817) Über die Staats-Ausgaben und Auflagen. Google Books
(1818) Über das Besteuerungs-System.


Notes{{Reflist}}
External links{{Commons}}

{{de icon}} Biography in Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie Vol. 41, pp. 539–550 by Daniel Jacoby.
A Bavarian Illuminati primer by Trevor W. McKeown.
Illuminati entry in The Catholic Encyclopedia, hosted by New Advent.

{{Age of Enlightenment}}{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Weishaupt, Adam}}











{{Authority control}}az:Adam Veyshaupt
ca:Adam Weishaupt
da:Adam Weishaupt
de:Adam Weishaupt
et:Adam Weishaupt
es:Adam Weishaupt
eo:Adam Weishaupt
fa:???? ??????????
fr:Adam Weishaupt
id:Adam Weishaupt
it:Adam Weishaupt
mk:???? ?????????
nl:Adam Weishaupt
no:Adam Weishaupt
pl:Adam Weishaupt
pt:Adam Weishaupt
ro:Adam Weishaupt
ru:?????????, ????
sl:Adam Weishaupt
fi:Adam Weishaupt
sv:Adam Weishaupt
tr:Adam Weishaupt
uk:???? ?????????