title{{Redirect}}
{{Infobox company}}Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. ({{New York Stock Exchange}}) or AMD is an American multinational semiconductor company based in Sunnyvale, California, that develops computer processors and related technologies for commercial and consumer markets. Its main products include microprocessors, motherboard chipsets, embedded processors and graphics processors for servers, workstations and personal computers, and embedded systems applications. AMD is the second-largest global supplier of microprocessors based on the x86 architecture and also one of the largest suppliers of graphics processing units. It also owns 8.6% of Spansion, a supplier of non-volatile flash memory. AMD is the only significant rival to Intel in the central processor (CPU) market for (x86 based) personal computers. Together they held 99.1 percent (Intel 80.3%, AMD 18.8%) of the CPU's sold for quarter three of 2011"AMD Gains Market Share over Intel" infoworld.com.  AMD and competitor Nvidia dominate the graphics processor (GPU) market, covering all of the top 70% of the performance benchmark, and making up 78 percent (Nvidia 44.8%, AMD 33.2%) of the GPUs in use in (x86 based) personal computers (Intel holding 6.6%)based on data collected by CPUBenchmark.net Nov. 2011.
Corporate history

Advanced Micro Devices was founded on May 1, 1969, by a group of former executives from Fairchild Semiconductor, including Jerry Sanders III, Ed Turney, John Carey, Sven Simonsen, Jack Gifford and three members from Gifford's team, Frank Botte, Jim Giles, and Larry Stenger. The company began as a producer of logic chips, then entered the RAM chip business in 1975. That same year, it introduced a reverse-engineered clone of the Intel 8080 microprocessor. During this period, AMD also designed and produced a series of bit-slice processor elements (Am2900, Am29116, Am293xx) which were used in various minicomputer designs.During this time, AMD attempted to embrace the perceived shift towards RISC with their own AMD 29K processor, and also attempted to diversify into graphics and audio devices as well as EPROM memory. It had some success in the mid-1980s with the AMD7910 and AMD7911 "World Chip" FSK modem, one of the first multistandard devices that covered both Bell and CCITT tones at up to 1200 baud half duplex or 300/300 full duplex. The AMD 29K survived as an embedded processor and AMD spinoff Spansion continues to make industry leading flash memory.  AMD decided to switch gears and concentrate solely on Intel-compatible microprocessors and flash memory, placing them in direct competition with Intel for x86 compatible processors and their flash memory secondary markets.AMD announced the acquisition of ATI Technologies on July 24, 2006. AMD paid $4.3&nbsp;billion in cash and 58&nbsp;million shares of its stock for a total of US$5.4&nbsp;billion. The transaction completed on October 25, 2006.{{cite web}}It was reported in December 2006 that AMD, along with its main rival in the graphics industry Nvidia, received subpoenas from the Justice Department regarding possible antitrust violations in the graphics card industry, including the act of fixing prices.{{cite web}}In October 2008, AMD announced plans to spin off manufacturing operations in the form of a multibillion-dollar joint venture with Advanced Technology Investment Co., an investment company formed by the government of Abu Dhabi. The new venture is called GlobalFoundries Inc.. This partnership will allow AMD to focus solely on chip design.{{cite news}}In August 2011, AMD announced that former Lenovo executive Rory Read would be joining the company as CEO.Dylan McGrath, EE Times. "Former IBM, Lenovo exec takes the helm at AMD." August 25, 2011. Retrieved August 25, 2011.On November 3, 2011 AMD said it was going to lay off 1,400 employees or about 10 percent of current worldwide staff. The curtailment will be finalized at Q1 2012 and mainly before Christmas 2011. It will cut operational saving by $10 million in Q4 2011 and more than $200 million in 2012.{{cite web}}
Processor market history
{{See also}}
IBM PC and the x86 architecture{{Main}}
In February 1982, AMD signed a contract with Intel, becoming a licensed second-source manufacturer of 8086 and 8088 processors. IBM wanted to use the Intel 8088 in its IBM PC, but IBM's policy at the time was to require at least two sources for its chips. AMD later produced the Am286 under the same arrangement, but Intel canceled the agreement in 1986 and refused to convey technical details of the i386 part. AMD challenged Intel's decision to cancel the agreement and won in arbitration, but Intel disputed this decision. A long legal dispute followed, ending in 1994 when the Supreme Court of California sided with AMD. Subsequent legal disputes centered on whether AMD had legal rights to use derivatives of Intel's microcode. In the face of uncertainty, AMD was forced to develop clean room designed versions of Intel code.In 1991, AMD released the Am386, its clone of the Intel 386 processor. It took less than a year for the company to sell a million units. Later, the Am486 was used by a number of large original equipment manufacturers, including Compaq, and proved popular. Another Am486-based product, the Am5x86, continued AMD's success as a low-price alternative. However, as product cycles shortened in the PC industry, the process of reverse engineering Intel's products became an ever less viable strategy for AMD.
K5, K6, Athlon, Duron, and Sempron{{Main}}AMD's first in-house x86 processor was the K5 which was launched in 1996.{{cite web}} The "K" was a reference to Kryptonite, which from comic book lore, was the only substance (radioactive pieces of his home planet) which could harm Superman, a clear reference to Intel, which dominated in the market at the time, as "Superman".{{cite news}}  The numeral "5" refers to the fifth processor generation, which Intel introduced as Pentium because the US Trademark and Patent Office ruled that mere numbers could not be trademarked.In 1996, AMD purchased NexGen specifically for the rights to their Nx series of x86-compatible processors. AMD gave the NexGen design team their own building, left them alone, and gave them time and money to rework the Nx686. The result was the K6 processor, introduced in 1997. Although the K6 was based on Socket 7, variants such as K6-3/450 were faster than Intel's Pentium II (sixth generation processor).The K7 was AMD's seventh generation x86 processor, making its debut on June 23, 1999, under the brand name Athlon. Unlike previous AMD processors, it could not be used on the same motherboards as Intels' due to licensing issues surrounding Intel's Slot 1 connector, and instead used a Slot A connector, referenced to the Alpha processor bus.  The Duron was a lower cost and limited version of the Athlon (64KB instead of 256KB L2 cache) in a 462-pin socketed PGA(socket A) or soldered directly on to the motherboard. Sempron was released as a lower cost Athlon XP replacing Duron in the socket A PGA era and since migrated upward to all new sockets up to AM3.On October 9, 2001 the Athlon XP was released, followed by the Athlon XP with 512KB L2 Cache on February 10, 2003.{{cite news}}
Athlon 64, Opteron and Phenom{{Main}}
The K8 was a major revision of the K7 architecture, with the most notable features being the addition of a 64-bit extension to the x86 instruction set (officially called AMD64), the incorporation of an on-chip memory controller, and the implementation of an extremely high performance point-to-point interconnect called HyperTransport, as part of the Direct Connect Architecture. The technology was initially launched as the Opteron server-oriented processor.Scott Wasson. "Workstation platforms compared", techreport.com, The Tech Report, LLC., 2003-09-15, Retrieved on July 29, 2007. Shortly thereafter it was incorporated into a product for desktop PCs, branded Athlon 64.Scott Wasson. "AMD's Athlon 64 processor", techreport.com, The Tech Report, LLC., September 23, 2003. Retrieved on July 29, 2007.AMD released the first dual core Opteron, an x86-based server CPU, on April 21, 2005.Scott Wasson. "AMD's dual-core Opteron processors", techreport.com, The Tech Report, LLC., April 21, 2005. Retrieved on July 29, 2007. The first desktop-based dual core processor family—the Athlon 64 X2—came a month later.Scott Wasson. "AMD's Athlon 64 X2 processors", techreport.com, The Tech Report, LLC., May 9, 2005. Retrieved on July 29, 2007. In early May 2007, AMD had abandoned the string "64" in its dual-core desktop product branding, becoming Athlon X2, downplaying the significance of 64-bit computing in its processors while upcoming updates involved some of the improvements to the microarchitecture, and a shift of target market from mainstream desktop systems to value dual-core desktop systems. AMD has also started to release dual-core Sempron processors in early 2008 exclusively in China, branded as Sempron 2000 series, with lower HyperTransport speed and smaller L2 cache, thus the firm completes its dual-core product portfolio for each market segment.The latest AMD microprocessor architecture, known as K10, became the successor to the K8 microarchitecture. The first processors released on this architecture were introduced on September 10, 2007 consisting of nine quad-core Third Generation Opteron processors. This was followed by the Phenom processor for desktop. K10 processors came in dual-core, triple-core,AMD announcement. Retrieved September 17, 2007. and quad-core versions with all cores on a single die. A new platform codename "Spider" was released utilising the new Phenom processor as well as an R770 GPU and a 790 GX/FX chipset from the AMD 700 chipset series. This was built at 65nm, hence it was uncompetitive with Intel, which had already progressed to the smaller and more power efficient 45nm node.In January 2009 AMD released a new processor line dubbed Phenom II, a refresh of the original Phenom built using the 45&nbsp;nm process. Along with this came a new platform codename "Dragon" which utilised a new Phenom II processor, an ATI R770 GPU from the R700 GPU family, as well as a 790 GX/FX chipset from the AMD 700 chipset series. This came in dual-core, triple-core and quad-core variants, all using the same die with cores disabled for the triple-core and dual-core versions. This resolved issues that the original Phenom had including low clock speed, a small L3 cache and a Cool'n'Quiet bug that decreased performance. This was price and performance competitive with Intel's mid to high range Core 2 Quads. The processor also enhanced the Phenom's memory controller, allowing it to use DDR3 in a new native socket AM3, while maintaining backwards compatibility with AM2+, the socket used for the Phenom, and allowing the use of the DDR2 memory that was used with the platform. In April 2010 a new Phenom II hexa-core (6 core) processor codenamed "Thuban" was released by AMD. This is a totally new die based on the hexa-core "Istanbul" Opteron processor. It also includes AMD's "turbo core" technology which allows the processor to automatically switch from 6 cores to 3 faster cores when more pure speed is needed.   This is part of AMD's Enthusiast platform codenamed ”Leo" utilising a new Phenom II processor, a new chipset from the AMD 800 chipset series and an ATI "Cypress" GPU from the Evergreen (GPU family) GPU series.The Magny Cours and Lisbon server parts will be released in 2010.{{update after}} The Magny Cours part will come in 8 to 12 cores and the Lisbon part will come in 4 and 6 core parts. Magny Cours is focused on performance while the Lisbon part is focused on high performance per watt. Magny Cours is an MCM (Multi-Chip Module) with two hexa-core "Istanbul" Opteron parts. This will use a new G34 socket for dual and quad socket processors and thus will be marketed as Opteron 61xx series processors. Lisbon uses C32 socket certified for dual socket use or single socket use only and thus will be marketed as Opteron 41xx processors. Both will be built on a 45&nbsp;nm SOI process.
Fusion, Bobcat and Bulldozer{{Main}}
After the merger between AMD and ATI, an initiative codenamed Fusion was announced that will merge a CPU and GPU on some of their entry level chips, including a minimum 16 lane PCI Express link to accommodate external PCI Express peripherals, thereby eliminating the requirement of a northbridge chip completely from the motherboard. The initiative will see some of the processing originally done on the CPU (e.g. Floating Point Unit operations) moved to the GPU, which is better optimized for calculations such as Floating Point Unit calculations. This is referred to by AMD as an Accelerated Processing Unit (APU).{{cite web}} AMD will move to a modular design methodology named "M-SPACE", where two new processor cores, codenamed "Bulldozer" and "Bobcat" will be released; Bulldozer is slated for the 2011 timeframe, whereas Bobcat is expected in Q4 2010.{{cite web}}While very little preliminary information exists even in AMD's Technology Analyst Day 2007, both cores are to be built from the ground up. The Bulldozer core focused on 10 watt to 100 watt products, with optimizations for performance-per-watt ratios and HPC applications and includes newly announced XOP, FMA4 and CVT16 instructions,{{cite web}} while the Bobcat core will focus on 1 watt to 10 watt products, given that the core is a simplified x86 core to reduce power draw. Both of the cores will be able to incorporate full DirectX compatible GPU core(s) under the Fusion label, or as standalone products as a general purpose CPU.Llano is to be the second APU  released, targeted at the mainstream market. This will incorporate a CPU and GPU on the same die, as well as the Northbridge functions, and labeled on AMD's new timeline as using "Socket FM1" with DDR3 memory. This will, however, not be based on the new bulldozer core and will in fact be similar to the current Phenom II "Deneb" processor serving as AMD's high-end processor until the release of the new 32&nbsp;nm parts. On September 28, 2011, AMD said that the third quarter of 2011 won't have a 10% revenue increase as AMD planned before, because of the manufacturing problem with the 32nm Llano Fusion chips.Jeffrey Burt, eWeek. "AMD Cuts Q3 Forecast Due to Chip Manufacturing Problems." September 28, 2011. Retrieved October 7, 2011.Bulldozer is revealed to be organized in modules, each consisting of two integer cores capable of processing integers and one floating point unit (FPU). Each module will be seen by the OS as two cores and all of AMD's new 2011, 32&nbsp;nm high-end desktop and server parts will be built on the Bulldozer microarchitecture, including Zambezi and Orochi for the desktop and Interlagos and Valencia for the server market. AMD’s Bulldozer/Orochi core die size is 315mm^2.Charlie Demerjian, Semi Accurate. "And the Bulldozer die size is……." Aug 21, 2011. Retrieved Aug 24, 2011.On August 31, 2011, AMD's Bulldozer created a new world record for CPU speed of 8429.4MHz (the old record was 8308.9MHz).Charlie Demerjian, Semi Accurate. "AMD sets clock speed world record with Bulldozer." Sep 13, 2011. Retrieved Sep 13, 2011.On September 26, 2011, new Opteron central processing units (CPUs), AMD's first new micro-architecture in eight years, will be unveiled. According to AMD, these new microprocessors' performance is 35% higher than current Opteron chips.Anton Shilov, XbitLabs. "AMD to Launch Next-Generation Opteron “Bulldozer” Microprocessors in Late September – Report." Aug 4, 2011. Retrieved Aug 12, 2011.
Products and technologies
Graphics products{{See also}}
After acquiring the graphics processor maker ATI Technologies in 2007, AMD restructured some of its combined product lines. Since 2010, all of the company's graphics processing products have been marketed under the AMD brand name.{{cite web}} The following are notable graphics processing product families and technologies by AMD:

Radeon is AMD&#39;s line of consumer 3D accelerator add-in cards. Mobility Radeon is a series of power-optimized versions of Radeon graphics chips for use in laptops.  They introduced innovations such as modularized RAM chips, DVD (MPEG2) acceleration, notebook GPU card sockets, and power management technology. AMD recently announced DirectX 11-compatible versions of its mobile processors.{{cite web}}
FirePro is AMD&#39;s line of professional graphics processors for workstations. Based on the Radeon series, it succeeds the FireGL series of workstation CAD/CAM video cards, and the FireMV series for workstations with 2D acceleration.
FireStream is a stream processor designed to utilize the stream processing/GPGPU (General Purpose Graphics Processing Units) concept for heavy floating-point computations to target various industries, such as the High Performance Computing (HPC), scientific, and financial sectors. The AMD FireStream can also be used as a floating-point co-processor for offloading CPU calculations, which is part of the Torrenza initiative.
EyeFinity - Allows up to 6 monitors to be connected to one card to allow surround-screen panoramic view.
EyeSpeed -  Allows you to experience games with true-to-life actions-and reactions. Features such as physics effects, Artificial Intelligence (AI), and more.


AMD chipsets{{See also}}
Before the launch of Athlon 64 processors in 2003, AMD designed chipsets for their processors spanning the K6 and K7 processor generations. The chipsets include the AMD-640, AMD-751 and the AMD-761 chipsets. The situation changed in 2003 with the release of Athlon 64 processors, and AMD chose not to further design its own chipsets for its desktop processors while opening the desktop platform to allow other firms to design chipsets. This is the "Open Platform Management Architecture" with ATI, VIA and SiS developing their own chipset for Athlon 64 processors and later Athlon 64 X2 and Athlon 64 FX processors, including the Quad FX platform chipset from Nvidia.The initiative went further with the release of Opteron server processors as AMD stopped the design of server chipsets in 2004 after releasing the AMD-8111 chipset, and again opened the server platform for firms to develop chipsets for Opteron processors. As of today, Nvidia and Broadcom are the sole designing firms of server chipsets for Opteron processors.As the company completed the acquisition of ATI Technologies in 2006, the firm gained the ATI design team for chipsets which previously designed the Radeon Xpress 200 and the Radeon Xpress 3200 chipsets. AMD then renamed the chipsets for AMD processors under AMD branding (for instance, the CrossFire Xpress 3200 chipset was renamed as AMD 580X CrossFire chipset). In February 2007, AMD announced the first AMD-branded chipset since 2004 with the release of the AMD 690G chipset (previously under the development codename RS690), targeted at mainstream IGP computing. It was the industry's first to implement a HDMI 1.2 port on motherboards, shipping for more than a million units. While ATI had aimed at releasing an Intel IGP chipset, the plan was scrapped and the inventories of Radeon Xpress 1250 (codenamed RS600, sold under ATI brand) was sold to two OEMs, Abit and ASRock. Although AMD states the firm will still produce Intel chipsets, Intel had not granted the license of {{nowrap}} FSB to ATI.On November 15, 2007, AMD announced a new chipset series portfolio, the AMD 7-Series chipsets, covering from enthusiast multi-graphics segment to value IGP segment, to replace the AMD 480/570/580 chipsets and AMD 690 series chipsets, marking AMD's first enthusiast multi-graphics chipset.  Discrete graphics chipsets were launched on November 15, 2007 as part of the codenamed Spider desktop platform, and IGP chipsets were launched at a later time in Spring 2008 as part of the codenamed Cartwheel platform.AMD returned to the server chipsets market with the AMD 800S series server chipsets. It includes support for up to six SATA 6.0 Gbit/s ports, the C6 power state, which is featured in Fusion processors and AHCI 1.2 with SATA FIS–based switching support. This is a chipset family supporting Phenom processors and Quad FX enthusiast platform (890FX), IGP(890GX).
AMD Live!{{Main}}As of 2007, AMD LIVE! was a platform marketing initiative focusing the consumer electronics segment, with an Active TV initiative for streaming Internet videos from web video services such as YouTube, into AMD Live! PC as well as connected digital TVs, together with a scheme for an ecosystem of certified peripherals for the ease of customers to identify peripherals for AMD Live! systems for digital home experience, called "AMD Live! Ready".Official Press Release (AMD Live! Ready and Active TV initiative)
AMD Quad FX platform{{Main}}
The AMD Quad FX platform, being an extreme enthusiast platform, allows two processors to connect through HyperTransport, which is a similar setup to dual-processor (2P) servers, excluding the use of buffered memory/registered memory DIMM modules, and a server motherboard, the current setup includes two Athlon 64 FX-70 series processors and a special motherboard. AMD pushed the platform for the surging demands for what AMD calls "megatasking" for true enthusiasts,Official Press Release (AMD Quad FX Platform with Dual Socket Direct Connect Architecture Redefines High-End Computing for Megatasking Enthusiasts) the ability to do more tasks on a single system. The platform refreshes with the introduction of Phenom FX processors and the next-generation RD790 chipset, codenamed "FASN8".
Commercial platformThe first AMD server/workstation platform after ATI acquisition is scheduled to be released on 2009 timeframe. Codenamed Fiorano, AMD's first multi-processor server platform after ATI acquisition consists of AMD SR5690 + SP5100 server chipsets, supporting 45 nm, codenamed Shanghai Socket F+ processors and registered DDR2 memory. Future update include the Maranello platform supporting 45 nm, codenamed Istanbul, Socket G34 processors with DDR3 memory. On single-processor platform, the codenamed Catalunya platform consists of codenamed Suzuka 45&nbsp;nm quad-core processor with AMD SR5580 + SP5100 chipset and DDR3 support.AMD Server/Workstation platform roadmap, retrieved October 4, 2008 {{Dead link}}AMD's x86 virtualization extension to the 64-bit x86 architecture is named AMD Virtualization, also known by the abbreviation AMD-V, and is sometimes referred to by the code name "Pacifica". AMD processors using Socket AM2, Socket S1, and Socket F include AMD Virtualization support. AMD Virtualization is also supported by release two (8200, 2200 and 1200 series) of the Opteron processors. The third generation (8300 and 2300 series) of Opteron processors will see an update in virtualization technology, specifically the Rapid Virtualization Indexing (also known by the development name Nested Page Tables), alongside the Tagged TLB and Device Exclusion Vector (DEV).AMD also promotes the "AMD I/O Virtualization Technology" (also known as IOMMU) for I/O virtualization.{{cite web}} The AMD IOMMU specification has been updated to version 1.2.{{cite web}} The specification describes the use of a HyperTransport architecture.AMD's commercial initiatives include the following:

AMD Trinity, provides support for virtualization, security and management. Key features include AMD-V technology, codenamed Presidio trusted computing platform technology, I/O Virtualization and Open Management Partition.AMD Analyst Day presentation, page 24. Retrieved July 14, 2007.
AMD Raiden, future clients similar to the Jack PC{{cite web}} to be connected through network to a blade server for central management, to reduce client form factor sizes with AMD Trinity features.
Torrenza, coprocessors support through interconnects such as HyperTransport, and PCI Express (though more focus was at HyperTransport enabled coprocessors), also opening processor socket architecture to other manufacturers, Sun and IBM are among the supporting consortium, with rumoured POWER7 processors would be socket-compatible to future Opteron processors. The move made rival Intel respond with the opening of Front Side Bus (FSB) architecture as well as Geneseo,{{cite web}} a collaboration project with IBM for coprocessors connected through PCI Express.
Various certified systems programs and platforms: AMD Commercial Stable Image Platform (CSIP), together with AMD Validated Server program, AMD True Server Solutions, AMD Thermally Tested Barebones Platforms and AMD Validated Server Program, providing certified systems for business from AMD.


Desktop platformsStarting in 2007, AMD, following Intel, began using codenames for its desktop platforms such as Spider or Dragon. The platforms, unlike Intel's approach, will refresh every year, putting focus on platform specialization. The platform includes components as AMD processors, chipsets, ATI graphics and other features, but continued to the open platform approach, and welcome components from other vendors such as VIA, SiS, and Nvidia, as well as wireless product vendors.Updates to the platform includes the implementation of IOMMU I/O Virtualization with 45 nm generation of processors, and the AMD 800 chipset series in 2009.AMD Financial Analyst Day 2007 presentation, presented by Mario Rivas, page 24 of 28. Retrieved December 14, 2007.
Embedded systems{{Main}}In February 2002, AMD acquired Alchemy Semiconductor for its Alchemy line of MIPS processors for the hand-held and portable media player markets. On June 13, 2006, AMD officially announced that the line was to be transferred to Raza Microelectronics, Inc., a designer of MIPS processors for embedded applications.{{cite news}}In August 2003, AMD also purchased the Geode business which was originally the Cyrix MediaGX from National Semiconductor to augment its existing line of embedded x86 processor products. During the second quarter of 2004, it launched new low-power Geode NX processors based on the K7 Thoroughbred architecture with speeds of fanless processors {{nowrap}} and {{nowrap}}, and {{nowrap}} processor with fan, of TDP 25 W. This technology is used in a variety of embedded systems (Casino slot machines and customer kiosks for instance), several UMPC designs in Asia markets, as well as the OLPC XO-1 computer, an inexpensive laptop computer intended to be distributed to children in developing countries around the world.For the past couple of years AMD has been introducing 64-bit processors into its embedded product line starting with the AMD Opteron processor.  Leveraging the high throughput enabled through HyperTransport and the Direct Connect Architecture these server class processors have been targeted at high end telecom and storage applications. In 2007 AMD added the AMD Athlon, AMD Turion and Mobile AMD Sempron processors to its embedded product line. Leveraging the same 64-bit instruction set and Direct Connect Architecture as the AMD Opteron but at lower power levels, these processors were well suited to a variety of traditional embedded applications. Throughout 2007 and into 2008 AMD has continued to add both single-core Mobile AMD Sempron and AMD Athlon processors and dual-core AMD Athlon X2 and AMD Turion processors to its embedded product line and now offers embedded 64-bit solutions starting with 8W TDP Mobile AMD Sempron and AMD Athlon processors for fan-less designs up to multi-processor systems leveraging multi-core AMD Opteron processors all supporting longer than standard availability.AMD Embedded Solutions that are scalable, x86- based, low-power and feature-rich products. Amd.com (2010-11-05). Retrieved on 2010-11-09.In April 2007, AMD announced the release of the M690T integrated graphics chipset for embedded designs. This enabled AMD to offer complete processor and chipset solutions targeted at embedded applications requiring high performance 3D and video such as emerging digital signage, kiosk and Point of Sale applications. The M690T was followed by the M690E specifically for embedded applications which removed the TV output, which required Macrovision licensing for OEMs, and enabled native support for dual TMDS outputs, enabling dual independent DVI interfaces.
Flash technology{{Main}}
While less visible to the general public than its CPU business, AMD is also a global leader in flash memory. In 1993, AMD established a 50-50 partnership with Fujitsu called FASL, and merged into a new company called FASL LLC in 2003. The joint venture firm went public under ticker symbol SPSN in December 2005, with AMD shares drop to 37%.AMD no longer directly participates in the Flash memory devices market now as AMD entered into a non-competition agreement, as of December 21, 2005, with Fujitsu and Spansion, pursuant to which it agreed not to directly or indirectly engage in a business that manufactures or supplies standalone semiconductor devices (including single chip, multiple chip or system devices) containing only Flash memory.{{cite web}}
Mobile platforms
{{Main}}AMD started a platform in 2003 aimed at mobile computing, but, with fewer advertisements and promotional schemes, very little was known about the platform. The platform used mobile Athlon 64 or mobile Sempron processors.The Puma platform and Turion Ultra processors were released on June 4, 2008. Unlike the desktop AMD Phenom processors of the time, Puma's Turion Ultra processors were based on older Athlon 64 X2 (K8) technology.September 10, 2009 saw the release of the Tigris platform; The first AMD mobile platform to use processors based on the K10 architecture, and first to use the new AMD Vision brand, categorizing laptop computers into four categories, based on performance.
The Danube platform was released on March 12, 2010, introducing quad-core processors and DDR3 support.The Fusion based Sabine platform was released in June 2011, utilizing up to four K10.5 based Stars cores, manufactured on the 32&nbsp;nm SOI process.
Other initiatives

50x15, digital inclusion, with targeted 50% of world population to be connected through Internet via affordable computers by the year of 2015.
The Green Grid,{{cite web}} founded by AMD together with other founders, such as IBM, Sun and Microsoft, to seek lower power consumption for grids.



Codenamed SIMFIRE interoperability testing tool for the Desktop and mobile Architecture for System Hardware (DASH) open architecture.


Software

Extensions for software parallelism (xSP), aimed at speeding up programs to enable multi-threaded and multi-core processing, announced in Technology Analyst Day 2007. One of the initiatives being discussed since August 2007 is the Light Weight Profiling (LWP), providing internal hardware monitor with runtimes, to observe information about executing process and help the re-design of software to be optimized with multi-core and even multi-threaded programs. Another one is the extension of Streaming SIMD Extension (SSE) instruction set, the SSE5.



AMD contributes to open source projects, including working with Sun Microsystems to enhance OpenSolaris and Sun xVM on the AMD platform.{{cite press release}} AMD also maintains its own Open64 compiler distribution and contributes its changes back to the community.{{cite web}}



In 2008, AMD released the low-level programming specifications for its GPUs, and works with the X.Org Foundation to develop drivers for AMD graphics cards.{{cite press release}}{{cite web}}



AMD has also taken an active part in developing coreboot, and open source projects aimed at replacing the proprietary BIOS firmware.



Other AMD open source projects include the AMD Performance Library and the AMD Core Math Library.


Production and fabrication{{Main}}Ever since the spinoff of AMD's fabrication plants in early 2009, GlobalFoundries has been responsible for producing AMD's processors.GlobalFoundries' main microprocessor manufacturing facilities are located in Dresden, Germany. Additionally, highly integrated microprocessors are manufactured in Taiwan made by third-party manufacturers under strict license from AMD. Between 2003 and 2005, they constructed a second manufacturing plant ({{nowrap}} 90 nm process SOI) in the same complex in order to increase the number of chips they can produce, thus becoming more competitive with Intel. The new plant has been named "Fab 36", in recognition of AMD's 36 years of operation, and reached full production in mid-2007. Fab 36 has been renamed to Fab 1 during the spinoff of AMD's manufacturing business during the creation of GlobalFoundries. In July 2007, AMD announced that they completed the conversion of Fab 1 Module 1 from {{nowrap}} to 65 nm.  They then shifted their focus to the 45 nm conversion.Rick C. Hodgin. While AMD was in the progression to 45 nm, its rival Intel Corp was one year ahead in manufacturing technology and releasing its 32 nm technology (Intel "tick-tock" advancement roadmap)"Wrap-up: AMD outlines a bright future at Technology Analyst Day", tgdaily.com, Tigervision Media, 2007-07-26, pp.4. Retrieved on July 29, 2007.
Corporate affairs
PartnershipsAMD utilizes strategic industry partnerships to further its business interests as well as to tackle Intel's dominance and resources.A partnership between AMD and Alpha Processor Inc. developed HyperTransport, a point-to-point interconnect standard which was turned over to an industry standards body for finalization. It is now used in modern AMD processor compatible motherboards.AMD also formed a strategic partnership with IBM, under which AMD gained silicon on insulator (SOI) manufacturing technology, and detailed advice on 90 nm implementation, the partnership was announced by AMD to be extended to 2011 for 32 nm and 22 nm fabrication related technologies.AMD Analyst Day June 2006 Presentation, slide 10 Further, AMD is loosely partnered with end-user companies such as HP, Compaq, ASUS, Alienware, Acer, Evesham Technology, Dell and several others to facilitate processor distribution and sales.On May 18, 2006, Dell announced that it would roll out new servers based on AMD's Opteron chips by years end, thus ending an exclusive relationship with Intel. Dell also began offering AMD Athlon X2 chips in their desktop line-up in September 2006.AMD is also a sponsor of the Scuderia Ferrari Marlboro F1 Team since 2002 and the Discovery Channel Pro Cycling Team since 2004, in 2009 AMD also became the jersey sponsor of the USL expansion team Austin Aztex FC.In June 2011,  HP announced new business and consumer notebooks equipped with the latest versions of AMD APUs – accelerated processing units. AMD will power HP's Intel-based business notebooks as well.Rik Myslewski, ChannelRegister. "Intel, AMD in HP notebook smackdown Which is faster? 'You tell me' says AMD." Jun 17, 2011. Retrieved Jun 20, 2011.
Litigation with Intel{{See also}}
AMD has a long history of litigation with former partner and x86 creator Intel.{{cite web}}{{cite web}}{{cite web}}

In 1986 Intel broke an agreement it had with AMD to allow them to produce Intel&#39;s micro-chips for IBM; AMD filed for arbitration in 1987 and the arbitrator decided in AMD&#39;s favor in 1992. Intel disputed this, and the case ended up in the Supreme Court of California. In 1994, that court upheld the arbitrator&#39;s decision and awarded damages for breach of contract.
In 1990, Intel brought a copyright infringement action alleging illegal use of its 287 microcode. The case ended in 1994 with a jury finding for AMD and its right to use Intel&#39;s microcode in its microprocessors through the 486 generation.
In 1997, Intel filed suit against AMD and Cyrix Corp. for misuse of the term MMX. AMD and Intel settled, with AMD acknowledging MMX as a trademark owned by Intel, and with Intel granting AMD rights to market the AMD K6 MMX processor.
In 2005, following an investigation, the Japan Federal Trade Commission found Intel guilty on a number of violations. On June 27, 2005, AMD won an antitrust suit against Intel in Japan, and on the same day, AMD filed a broad antitrust complaint against Intel in the U.S. Federal District Court in Delaware. The complaint alleges systematic use of secret rebates, special discounts, threats, and other means used by Intel to lock AMD processors out of the global market. Since the start of this action, the court has issued subpoenas to major computer manufacturers including Acer, Dell, Lenovo, HP and Toshiba.
In November 2009, Intel agreed to pay AMD $1.25bn and renew a five-year patent cross-licensing agreement as part of a deal to settle all outstanding legal disputes between them.
Intel, AMD Settle Legal Disputes. "http://www.foxbusiness.com/story/markets/industries/technology/amd-intel-settle-legal-disputes/"
Events and publicationsAlthough AMD frequently refuses to provide information about upcoming products and plans, it does hold annual Analyst Days  to reveal and explain key future technologies, and to present official technology roadmaps. The event held in mid-year is referred to as "Technology Analyst Day", with its main focus on upcoming technologies and trends. The end-of-year event is referred to as "Financial Analyst Day" and focuses on the financial performance of the company through the previous year.AMD Financial Analyst Day 2007 page. Retrieved December 14, 2007.In addition to these events, AMD also publishes printed media. Publications include the AMD Accelerate and the discontinued AMDEdge. The AMD Accelerate magazine, originally published through Ziff Davis Media, focuses on SME and business applications, while AMD Edge focused on overall technologies from AMD. Since Ziff Davis Media filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, the AMD Accelerate magazine has been published through IDG. AMD also has electronic newsletters to promote its server-oriented Opteron processors and related business solutions.
Guinness World Record Achievement
 In 2011, Advanced Micro Devices Inc. announced that it had achieved the Guinness World Record for the "Highest frequency of a computer processor." Peter Clarke, EE Times. "AMD 'clocks' FX processor at 8.429-GHz." September 13, 2011. Retrieved September 15, 2011. The company ran an 8-core FX-8150 processor at 8.429-GHz. The record was set on August 31, 2011 in Austin Texas. The previous record was 8.308-GHz with Intel Celeron 352 (one core).On November 1st, 2011, AMD's exact same microprocessor, the FX-8150 was used to break the record yet-again at a slightly higher 8.461GHz.Matthew Humprhires, Geek.com. "AMD clocks FX-8150 at 8.461-GHz." November 1, 2011. Retrieved November 1, 2011.
See also{{Portal box}}
{{Columns-list}}
References{{Reflist}}

AMD ShangHai Processor
AMD: 30 Years of Pursuing the Leader
Cpu-collection.de AMD processor images and descriptions
AMD goes dual-core
Why AMD-MHz don't equal Intel-MHz
AMD's most recent conference call transcripts 
A look at AMD's manufacturing process technologies 
AMD/Intel Settlement


External links{{Commons category}}

AMD Corporate Website
AMD Live!
AMD Developer Central
{{HSW}}

{{AMD processors}}
{{ATI}}
{{Major information technology companies}}
{{Coord}}
{{Use mdy dates}}



af:AMD
ar:??????? ?????? ??????
bn:??????????? ??????? ????????
be:AMD
bg:AMD
bs:AMD
ca:AMD
cs:Advanced Micro Devices
da:AMD
de:AMD
et:AMD
el:Advanced Micro Devices
es:Advanced Micro Devices
eo:AMD
fa:????????
fr:Advanced Micro Devices
gl:AMD
ko:????? ???? ?????
hy:AMD
hi:????????? ??????? ?????????
hr:AMD
id:Advanced Micro Devices
is:AMD
it:Advanced Micro Devices
he:AMD
kn:??????????????? ?????? ???????
lt:AMD
hu:Advanced Micro Devices
ml:?.??.??.
mr:?.??.??.
ms:Advanced Micro Devices
nl:Advanced Micro Devices
ja:?????????????????
no:Advanced Micro Devices
nn:AMD
pl:Advanced Micro Devices
pt:AMD
kaa:Advanced Micro Devices
ro:Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.
ru:Advanced Micro Devices
sco:AMD
si:??????????? ???????? ?????????? ???????????
simple:Advanced Micro Devices
sk:Advanced Micro Devices
sl:Advanced Micro Devices
sr:AMD
sh:AMD
fi:AMD
sv:Advanced Micro Devices
ta:??????????? ?????? ???????
th:????????
tr:Advanced Micro Devices
uk:Advanced Micro Devices
vi:AMD
zh-yue:AMD
zh:?????