title{{Other uses}}An adventure is defined as an exciting or unusual experience; it may also be a bold, usually risky undertaking, with an uncertain outcome.Dictionary.com Unabridged. Retrieved 4 January 2011. The term is often used to refer to activities with some potential for physical danger, such as skydiving, mountain climbing and or participating in extreme sports. The term also broadly refers to any enterprise that is potentially fraught with physical, financial or psychological risk, such as a business venture, a love affair, or other major life undertakings.New York TimesNew York TimesLos Angeles TimesLos Angeles TimesAdventurous experiences create psychological and physiological arousal,{{citation}} which can be interpreted as negative (e.g. fear) or positive (e.g. flow), and which can be detrimental as stated by the Yerkes-Dodson law.  For some people, adventure becomes a major pursuit in and of itself. According to adventurer André Malraux, in his La Condition Humaine (1933), "If a man is not ready to risk his life, where is his dignity?". Similarly, Helen Keller stated that "Life is either a daring adventure or nothing."Outdoor adventurous activities are typically undertaken for the purposes of recreation or excitement: examples are  adventure racing and adventure tourism. Adventurous activities can also lead to gains in knowledge, such as those undertaken by explorers and pioneers. Adventure education intentionally uses challenging experiences for learning.
Adventure in mythologySome of the oldest and most widespread stories in the world are stories of adventure such as Homer's The Odyssey.New York TimesNew York TimesZweig, P. (1974). The adventurer: The fate of adventure in the Western world, New York: Basic Books. Mythologist Joseph Campbell discussed his notion of the monomyth in his book, The Hero with a Thousand Faces. Campbell proposed that the heroic mythological stories from culture to culture followed a similar underlying pattern, starting with the "call to adventure", followed by a hazardous journey, and eventual triumph. The adventure novel exhibits these "protagonist on adventurous journey" characteristics as do many popular feature films, such as Star WarsNew York Times and Raiders of the Lost Ark.New York Times


AdventurersAn adventurer is a person who bases his lifestyle or their fortunes on adventurous acts. An adventurer or adventuress is a term that usually takes one of three meanings:

One whose travels are unusual and often exotic, though not so unique as to qualify as exploration.
One who lives by their wits.
One who takes part in a risky or speculative course of action for profit or position.

In fiction, the adventurer figure or Picaro may be regarded as a descendant of the knight-errant of Medieval romance. Like the knight, the adventurer roams through episodic encounters, usually involving wealth, romance, or fighting. Unlike the knight, the adventurer was a realistic figure, often lower class or otherwise impoverished, who is forced to make his way to fortune, often by deceit. The picaresque novel originated in Spain in the middle of the fifteenth century, showcasing adventurers as roguish heroes of low social class who live by their wits in a corrupt society. Novels such as Lazarillo de Tormes were influential across Europe. Throughout the eighteenth century, a great number of  novels featured bold, amoral, adventuring protagonists, who made their way into wealth and happiness, sometimes with and sometimes without the moral conversion that generally accompanies the Spanish model.Under Victorian morality the term, used without qualifiers, came to imply a person of low moral character, often someone trying to marry for money.In comic books such as Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe and Who's Who: The Definitive Directory of the DC Universe, the term "adventurer" is used as a synonym for "super-hero" when listing a character's occupation.In role-playing games, the player characters are often professional adventurers, who earn wealth and fame by adventure, such as undertaking hazardous missions, exploring ruins, and slaying monsters. This stereotype is strong enough that the adventurers can often be used as a synonym for the player characters. Non-player character groups of adventurers can also exist, and can be an interesting encounter for the players.
List of adventurers
Historical adventurers



Roy Chapman Andrews
Ibn Battuta
George Bogle
Frederick Gustavus Burnaby
Richard Francis Burton
Martha Jane "Calamity Jane" Canary-Burke
Giacomo Casanova
Percy Fawcett
Bartholomew Gosnold
Mata Hari
James Holman
Alexander von Humboldt
Jørgen Jørgensen
T. E. Lawrence
 

David Livingstone
Charles Fletcher Lummis
Ranald MacDonald
F.A. Mitchell-Hedges
John Muir
Marco Polo
Arthur Rimbaud
Teddy Roosevelt
Ernest Shackleton
Captain John Smith
Gustavus von Tempsky
Edward John Trelawny
Edward Maria Wingfield
Zheng He
 

Modern adventurers{{Cleanup-laundry}}



Tania Aebi
Benedict Allen
Peter Blake (1948 – 2001)
Charley Boorman
Stanis?aw Bu?ak-Ba?achowicz (1883 – 1940)
Brian Caldwell
Morris Cohen (1887 – 1970)
Tim Cope
Laura Dekker
David Dicks
Jessica Dubroff (1988 – 1996)
Hayatullah Khan Durrani
Amelia Earhart (1897 – [1937]?)
Ranulph Fiennes
Ben Fogle
Steve Fossett (1944 – 2007)
Joshua French and Tjostolv Moland
Josh Gates
John Goddard
Robin Lee Graham
 

Bear Grylls
Richard Halliburton (1900 – 1939)
Heinrich Harrer (1912 – 2006)
David Hempleman-Adams
Thor Heyerdahl (1914 – 2002)
Mike Horn
Alastair Humphreys
George Kourounis
David Henry Lewis (1917 – 2002)
Jason Lewis
Rory MacLean
Jesse Martin
David Mayer de Rothschild
Christopher McCandless (1968 – 1992)
Ewan McGregor
Ferdynand Antoni Ossendowski (1876 – 1945)
Bruce Parry
David Cornthwaite
Robert Young Pelton
Michael Perham
 

Bertrand Piccard
Simon Reeve
Jim Rogers
Tahir Shah
Reid Stowe
Les Stroud
Abby Sunderland
Zac Sunderland
Vicki Van Meter (1982 – 2008)
Ed Viesturs
Ed Wardle
Jessica Watson
Jock Wishart
 

Fictional adventurers



Allan Quatermain
Alanna of Trebond
Argonauts
Avatar: The Last Airbender
Baron Munchausen
Benjamin Gates
Bilbo Baggins
Conan the Barbarian
Corwin of Amber
Charles Muntz
Corto Maltese
Dirk Pitt
Doc Savage
The Doctor
Don Quixote
Drizzt Do'Urden
Evelyn Carnahan-O'ConnellMummy.wikia.com
Finn and Jake (from Adventure Time)
 

Flapjack
Flash Gordon
Flynn Rider
Frodo Baggins
Han Solo
Indiana Jones
Jack Flanders
Jack T. Colton
Jake English (from Homestuck)
John Carter (character)
Jonny Quest
Johnny Thunder (from Lego Adventurers)
Lara Croft
Lemuel Gulliver
Link (The Legend of Zelda)
Lord Asriel
Luke Skywalker
 

MacGyver
Monkey D. Luffy
Nathan Drake
Odysseus
Randolph Carter
Rick O'Connell
Rip Haywire
Rusty Venture
Scrooge McDuck
Sinbad
Solomon Kane
Son Goku
Spirou
Tintin
Tom Swift
Xena
 

See also

List of genres


References{{Reflist}}
External links{{wikiquote}}bg:???????????
de:Abenteuer
es:Aventura
eo:Aventuro
fr:Aventure
ja:??
ro:Aventur?
ru:???????????
sv:Äventyr
tk:Awantýura
uk:???????