title{{About}}
{{refimprove}}
Aeneas ({{IPAc-en}}; Greek: {{Unicode}}, Aineías, derived from Greek ???? meaning "to praise"), in Greco-Roman mythology, was a Trojan hero, the son of the prince Anchises and the goddess Aphrodite. His father was the second cousin of King Priam of Troy, making Aeneas Priam's second cousin, once removed. The journey of Aeneas from Troy (with help from Aphrodite), which led to the founding of a hamlet south of Rome, is recounted in Virgil's Aeneid. He is considered an  important figure in Greek and Roman legend. Aeneas is a character in Homer's Iliad, Quintus Smyrnaeus' Posthomerica, and Shakespeare's Troilus and Cressida.
Mythology
In the Iliad, Aeneas is the leader of the Trojan's Dardanian allies (Trojans — descendants of Dardanus), as well as a third cousin and principal lieutenant of Hector, son of the Trojan king Priam. In the poem, Aeneas' mother Aphrodite frequently comes to his aid on the battlefield; he is a favorite of Apollo. Aphrodite and Apollo rescue Aeneas from combat with Diomedes of Argos, who nearly kills him, and carry him away to Pergamos for healing. Even Poseidon, who normally favors the Greeks, comes to Aeneas' rescue after he falls under the assault of Achilles, noting that Aeneas, though from a junior branch of the royal family, is destined to become king of the Trojan people.  Aeneas killed 28 people in the Trojan War.Hyginus, Fabulae 115.As seen in the first books of the Aeneid, Aeneas is one of the few Trojans who were not killed in battle or enslaved when Troy fell.  When Troy was sacked by the Greeks, Aeneas, after being commanded by the gods to flee, gathered a group, collectively known as the Aeneads, who then traveled to Italy and became progenitors of the Romans. The Aeneads included Aeneas' trumpeter Misenus, his father Anchises, his friends Achates, Sergestus and Acmon, the healer Iapyx, the steady helmsman Palinurus, and his son Ascanius (also known as Iulus, Julus, or Ascanius Julius.) He carried with him the Lares and Penates, the statues of the household gods of Troy, and transplanted them to Italy.(From here on, the context shifts from Greek to Roman, so the Roman names of the gods will be used, except for Aphrodite.)After a brief but fierce storm sent up against the group at Juno's request, and several failed attempts to found cities,  Aeneas and his fleet made landfall at Carthage after six years of wanderings.  Aeneas had a year-long affair with the Carthaginian queen Dido (also known as Elissa), who proposed that the Trojans settle in her land and that she and Aeneas reign jointly over their peoples. Once again, this was in favour of Juno, who was told of the fact that her favorite city would eventually be defeated by the Trojans' descendants.  However, the messenger god Mercury was sent by Jupiter and Aphrodite to remind Aeneas of his journey and his purpose, thus compelling him to leave secretly and continue on his way. When Dido learned of this, she ordered her sister Anna to construct a pyre, she said, to get rid of Aeneas' possessions, left behind by him in his haste to leave.  Standing on it, Dido uttered a curse that would forever pit Carthage against Rome. She then committed suicide by stabbing herself with the same sword she gave Aeneas when they first met and then falling on the pyre. Anna reproached the mortally wounded Dido. Meanwhile, Juno, looking down on the tragedy and moved by Dido's plight, sent Iris to make Dido's passage to Hades quicker and less painful. When Aeneas later traveled to Hades, he called to her ghost but although she recognized him, she turned away (aversa) and kept her eyes fixed on the ground (solo fixos oculos)The company stopped on the island of Sicily during the course of their journey. After the first trip, before the Trojans went to Carthage, Achaemenides, one of Odysseus' crew who had been left behind, traveled with them.  After visiting Carthage, the Trojans returned to Sicily where they were welcomed by Acestes, king of the region and son of the river Crinisus by a Dardanian woman.Latinus, king of the Latins, welcomed Aeneas' army of exiled Trojans and let them reorganize their lives in Latium. His daughter Lavinia had been promised to Turnus, king of the Rutuli, but Latinus received a prophecy that Lavinia would be betrothed to one from another land &mdash; namely, Aeneas. Latinus heeded the prophecy, and Turnus consequently declared war on Aeneas at the urging of Juno, who was aligned with King Mezentius of the Etruscans and Queen Amata of the Latins. Aeneas' forces prevailed. Turnus was killed and his people were captured. According to Livy, Aeneas was victorious but Latinus died in the war. Aeneas founded the city of Lavinium, named after his wife. He later welcomed Dido's sister, Anna Perenna, who then committed suicide after learning of Lavinia's jealousy.After Aeneas' death, Aphrodite asked Jupiter to make her son immortal. Jupiter agreed and the river god Numicus cleansed Aeneas of all his mortal parts and Aphrodite anointed him with Ambrosia and Nectar, making him a god. Aeneas was recognized as the god Jupiter Indiges. Inspired by the work of James Frazer, some have posited that Aeneas was originally a life-death-rebirth deity.
Family and legendary descendants
Aeneas had an extensive family tree. His wet-nurse was Caieta, and he is the father of Ascanius with Creusa, and of Silvius with Lavinia. The former, also known as Iulus (or Julius), founded Alba Longa and was the first in a long series of kings. According to the mythology outlined by Virgil in the Aeneid, Romulus and Remus were both descendants of Aeneas through their mother Rhea Silvia, making Aeneas progenitor of the Roman people. Some early sources call him their father or grandfather,Romulus by Plutarch but considering the commonly accepted dates of the fall of Troy (1184 BC) and the founding of Rome (753 BC), this seems unlikely. The Julian family of Rome, most notably Julius Cæsar and Augustus, traced their lineage to Ascanius and Aeneas, thus to the goddess Aphrodite. Through the Julians, the Palemonids make this claim. The legendary kings of Britain trace their family through a grandson of Aeneas, Brutus.
Physical appearance
In Virgil's Aeneid, Aeneas is described as strong and handsome, but his hair colour or complexion are not described.What Does Aeneas Look like?, Mark Griffith, Classical Philology, Vol. 80, No. 4 (Oct., 1985), p. 309. In late antiquity however sources add further physical descriptions. The Daretis Phrygii de excidio Trojae historia of Dares Phrygius describes Aeneas as ‘‘auburn-haired, stocky, eloquent, courteous, prudent, pious, and charming.’’http://www.theoi.com/Text/DaresPhrygius.html There is also a brief physical description found in John Malalas' Chronographia:‘‘Aeneas: short, fat, with a good chest, powerful, with a ruddy complexion, a broad face, 
a good nose, fair skin, bald on the forehead, a good beard, grey eyes.’’Illuminated prophet books: a study of Byzantine manuscripts of the major and minor prophets, John Lowden, Penn State Press, 1988, p. 62
Literature, theatre and film
Aeneas is the subject of the French mediaeval romance Roman d'Enéas.Aeneas is also a titular character in Henry Purcell's opera Dido and Aeneas.In modern literature, Aeneas appears in David Gemmell's Troy series as a main heroic character who goes by the name Helikaon.Aeneas is a main character in Ursula K. Le Guin's Lavinia, a re-telling of the last six books of the Aeneid told from the point of view of Lavinia, daughter of King Latinus of Latium.Despite the many Hollywood elements, Aeneas has received little interest from the film industry. Portrayed by Steve Reeves, he was the main character in the 1961 sword-and-sandal peplum Guerra di Troia (The Trojan War).  Reeves reprised the role the following year in the film The Avenger, about Aeneas's arrival in Latium and his conflicts with local tribes as he tries to settle his fellow Trojan refugees there.The most recent cinematic portrayal of Aeneas was in the film Troy, in which he appears as a youth charged by Paris to protect the Trojan refugees, and to continue the ideals of the city and its people. It is at this point that Paris gives Aeneas Priam's sword, in order to give legitimacy and continuity to the Royal Line of Troy - and lay the foundations of Rome.
Family tree{{Trojan race}}
See also

Cumaean Sibyl
The Golden Bough


Notes{{Reflist}}
see A.C Grayling Book The Choice of Hercules
References{{Commons category}}
{{Wikisource1911Enc}}

Classical sources
Homer, Iliad II, 819-21; V, 217-575; XIII, 455-544; XX, 75-352;
Apollodorus, Bibliotheke III, xii, 2;
Apollodorus, Epitome III, 32-IV, 2; V, 21;
Virgil, Aeneid;
Ovid, Metamorphoses XIV, 581-608;
Ovid, Heroides, VII.
Livy, Book 1

{{Roman myth (mortal)}}
{{Roman religion}}
{{Characters in the Iliad}}{{DEFAULTSORT:Aeneas}}









ar:??????
be:????
bs:Eneja
bg:????
ca:Enees
cs:Aineiás
cy:Aeneas
da:Æneas
de:Aeneas
et:Aineias
el:???????
es:Eneas
eo:Eneo
eu:Eneas
fa:??????
fr:Énée
fur:Enee
ga:Aeinéas
gl:Eneas
ko:??????
hr:Eneja
id:Aineias
ia:Eneas
is:Eneas
it:Enea
he:??????
ka:??????
la:Aeneas
lt:En?jas
li:Aeneas
hu:Aineiasz
mt:Enea
nl:Aeneas
ja:???????
no:Aineias
nn:Aeneas
pl:Eneasz (syn Anchizesa)
pt:Eneias
ro:Aeneas
ru:????
sq:Enea
scn:Enea (iroi)
simple:Aeneas
sk:Aineias
sr:?????
sh:Eneja
fi:Aineias
sv:Aeneas
tl:Aineias
th:???????
tr:Aeneas
uk:????
vi:Aeneas
yi:??????
zh:????