title{{Infobox Person}}Afonso de Albuquerque[p][n] (or archaically spelt as Aphonso d'Albuquerque and also spelt as Affonso, Alfonso, and Alphonso; {{IPA-pt}}; 1453{{ndash}}December 16, 1515) was a Portuguese fidalgo, or nobleman, an admiral whose military and administrative activities as second governor of Portuguese India conquered and established the Portuguese colonial empire in the Indian Ocean. He is generally considered a world conquest military genius,John Villiers, Thomas Foster Earle(1990). Albuquerque, Caesar of the East:
selected texts, p.7, 308. Aris & Phillips:ISBN 0856684880Diffie, Bailey W. and George D. Winius (1977),Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415–1580(p271) Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.ISBN 0816607826 given his successful strategy: he attempted to close all the Indian ocean naval passages to the Atlantic, Red Sea, Persian Gulf, and to the Pacific, transforming it into a Portuguese mare clausum established over the Turkish power and their Muslim and Hindu allies.{{cite web}}
He was responsible for building numerous fortresses to defend key strategic positions and establishing a net of diplomatic relations. Shortly before his death he was appointed viceroy and "Duke of Goa" by king Manuel I of Portugal, becoming the first Portuguese duke not from the royal family, and the first Portuguese title landed overseas. For some time he was known as The Terrible, The Great, The Caesar of the East, Lion of the Seas and as The Portuguese Mars.
Early lifeAfonso de Albuquerque was born in 1453 in Alhandra, near Lisbon.{{cite book}} He was the second son of Gonçalo de Albuquerque, Lord of Vila Verde dos Francos and Dona Leonor de Menezes. His father held an important position at court and was connected by remote illegitimate descent with the Portuguese monarchy. He was educated in mathematics and Latin at the court of Afonso V of Portugal, where he befriended Prince John, future king John II of Portugal.Morse Stephens, "Albuquerque" 
He served ten years in North Africa, where he acquired military experience. In 1471, under the command of Afonso V, he was present at the conquest of Tangier and Arzila in Morocco,{{cite web}} serving there as an officer for some years. In 1476 he accompanied Prince John in wars against Castile, such as the Battle of Toro. He was in the squadron sent to the Italian Peninsula in 1480 to rescue Ferdinand II of Aragon from the Ottoman invasion of Otranto that ended in a Christian victory.{{cite web}} On his return in 1481, when Prince John was crowned, Albuquerque was appointed chief equerry (estribeiro-mor) to the king. In 1489 he returned to service in North Africa, as commander of defence in the fortress of Graciosa, an island in the river Luco near the city of Larache, and in 1490 was part of the guard of King John II, returning to Arzila in 1495 where his younger brother Martim died fighting by his side.
First Expedition to India, 1503{{main}}
When king Manuel I of Portugal was enthroned he showed some reticence towards Albuquerque, a close friend of his dreaded predecessor John II, and seventeen years his senior. Eight years later, on April 6 of 1503, after a long military career and at a mature age, Afonso de Albuquerque was sent on his first expedition to India with his cousin Francisco de Albuquerque. Each commanded three ships, sailing along with Duarte Pacheco Pereira and Nicolau Coelho. They participated in several battles against the forces of the Zamorin of Calicut (Calecute,Kozhikode) and succeeded in establishing the king of Cohin (Cohim, Kochi) securely on his throne. In return, the King gave them permission to build a Portuguese fort at Cochin and establish trade relations with Quilon (Coulão, Kollam). This laid the foundation of Portugal's empire in the East.
Second Expedition to India, 1506{{main}}

Albuquerque returned home in July 1504, and was well received by King Manuel I of Portugal. After Albuquerque assisted with the creation of a strategy for the Portuguese efforts in the east, King Manuel entrusted him with the command of a squadron of five vessels in the fleet of sixteen sailing for India in early 1506 headed by Tristão da Cunha. Their aim was to conquer Socotra and build a fortress there, hoping to close the trade in the Red Sea. Albuquerque went as chief-captain for the "Coast of Arabia" sailing under command of da Cunha until reaching Mozambique.Diogo do Couto, "Décadas da Ásia", década X, livro I He carried a sealed letter with a secret mission ordered by the king: after fulfilling the first mission he should replace the first Viceroy of India, Francisco de Almeida, whose term ended two years later.Foundations of the Portuguese empire, 1415-1580, p. 239, Bailey Wallys Diffie, Boyd C. Shafer, George Davison Winius Before departing he legitimated a natural son born in 1500 and made his will.
Socotra and Hormuz first conquest, 1507{{main}}
The fleet left Lisbon on April 6, 1506.  Albuquerque piloted his ship himself, having lost his appointed pilot on departure. In Mozambique Channel they rescued captain João da Nova who joined his ship Frol de la mar to the fleet, having been stranded on his return from India.Albuquerque, Braz de (1774). Commentarios do grande Afonso Dalboquerque. Lisbon: Na Regia Officina Typografica. Available in English as The Commentaries of the Great Afonso Dalboquerque, Second Viceroy of India. Laurier Books Ltd. /AES 2000. ISBN 978-8120615144 From Malindi, da Cunha sent envoys to Ethiopia, which at the time was thought to be closer than it actually is. Those included priest João Gomes, João Sanches and Tunisian Sid Mohammed who, having failed to cross the region, headed for Socotra from where Albuquerque managed to land them in Filuk.J. J. Hespeler-Boultbee, "A Story in Stones: Portugal's Influence on Culture and Architecture in the Highlands of Ethiopia 1493-1634", p.178, CCB Publishing, 2006, ISBN 0978116216 After a series of successful attacks on Arab cities on east Africa coasts, they conquered Socotra, and built a fortress at Suq, hoping it would be a base to stop the Red Sea commerce to the Indian Ocean.However, Socotra was abandoned four years later, as it was not advantageous as a base.- see "Foundations of the Portuguese empire, 1415-1580, Diffie, Shafer, Winius", p. 233 
From Socotra their ways parted: Tristão da Cunha sailed for India, where he would relieve the Portuguese besieged at Cannanore, and Albuquerque sailed with a fleet of seven ships and five hundred men in an unrequested advance towards Ormuz in the Persian Gulf, one of the eastern chief centers of commerce. On this route he conquered the cities of Curiati (Kuryat), Muscat in July 1507 and Khor Fakkan, accepting the submission of the cities of Kalhat and Sohar. On September 25 they arrived with a fearsome reputation at Ormuz and soon captured the city, which agreed to become a tributary state for the Portuguese king. A few days later, the king of Ormuz was met by an envoy demanding the payment of tribute to shah Ismail I from Persia. He was sent back with the answer that the only tribute would be in cannon-balls and guns, thus beginning the connection between Albuquerque and Shah Ismail I (often named Xeque Ismael).Molesworth Sykes,"A History of Persia", p.271, READ BOOKS, 2006, ISBN 1406726923According to Brás de Albuquerque it was Xeque Ismael who coined the term "Lion of the seas" for Albuquerque Immediately Albuquerque began building the Fort of Our Lady of Victory (later renamed Fort of Our Lady of the Conception).{{cite book}} engaging his men of all ranks in the works.
However, some of his officers revolted against the heavy works and climate, and claiming that Albuquerque was exceeding his orders departed for India. With the fleet reduced to only two ships and left without supplies he was unable to maintain this position for long. Forced to abandon Ormuz in January 1508, he raided coastal villages to resupply the settlement of Socotra, returned to Ormuz and only then headed to India.
Arrested at Cannanore, 1509Albuquerque arrived at Cannanore on the Malabar coast in December 1508, where he immediately opened before the viceroy Dom Francisco de Almeida the sealed letter he had received from the king, appointing him governor.Afonso de Albuquerque, like many others since then, took office as Governor: when appointing the Viceroy Francisco de Almeida, the king promised not to appoint another in his lifetime, a vote of confidence in contradiction with the short term of three years he gave him, that may be due to the great fears about the sharing of power that this position represented. See Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415-1580, p. 239, Por Bailey Wallys Diffie, Boyd C. 239, by Bailey Wallys Diffie, Boyd C. Shafer, George Davison Winius Shafer, George Davison WiniusIn the first months of 1508 the son of D. Francisco de Almeida, Lourenço de Almeida, died in dramatic circumstances at the Battle of Chaul and there are reports that the viceroy, an enlightened and incorruptible ruler, turned vindictive and cruel. The viceroy, then joined by the officers who had defeated Albuquerque in Ormuz, had a matching royal order, but declined to yield, protesting that his term ended only in January and stating his intention to avenge his son's death by fighting the mameluk fleet of Mirocem, refusing Albuquerque's offer to fight him himself. Afonso de Albuquerque obeyed without confronting D. Francisco de Almeida - which could have led to civil war - and moved to Kochi, pending instructions from Portugal, supporting and housing his entourage himself. He was described by Fernão Lopes de Castanheda as patiently enduring an open opposition from the group that had gathered around D. Francisco de Almeida, with whom he kept formal contacts. Increasingly isolated, he wrote to Diogo Lopes de Sequeira, who was arriving with a new fleet to India, but was ignored as Sequeira joined the Viceroy. At the same time Albuquerque refused approaches from opponents of the viceroy, who challenged him to take power.Castanheda, Fernão Lopes de, "História do descobrimento e conquista da Índia pelos portugueses" (Full text).On February 3, 1509 Almeida fought the naval Battle of Diu against a joint fleet of Mamluks, Ottomans, the zamorin of Calicut and the sultan of Gujarat, taking it as personal revenge for the death of his son Lourenço de Almeida at the Battle of Chaul. His victory was decisive: Ottomans and Mamluks left the waters of the Indian Ocean, easing the Portuguese rule for over 100 years. In August, after a petition from Albuquerque's former officers with the support of Diogo Lopes de Sequeira considering him unfit for governance, he was sent in custody in an old ship to St. Angelo Fort in Cannanore.Henry Morse Stephens, "Albuquerque", p.61-62, ISBN 8120615247R.S. Whiteway, "Rise of Portuguese Power in India, 1497-1550" p.126, ISBN 8120605004 There he remained under what he considered to be imprisonment. In September 1509 Sequeira advanced the mission of establishing contact with the Sultan of Malacca but failed, leaving behind 19 Portuguese prisoners.
Governor of Portuguese India, 1509-1515Albuquerque was released after three months' confinement, on the arrival at Cannanore of the grand-marshal of Portugal with a large fleet.{{cite news}} He was the most important Portuguese noble ever to visit India and he brought an armada of fifteen ships and 3,000 men sent by the king to defend the rights of Albuquerque and take Calicut.Neto, Ricardo Bonalume. MHQ: The Quarterly Journal of Military History pp. 68. Cowles Enthusiast Media Spring. 2002-04-01.(Page news on 2006-10-20) In 4 November 1509 Albuquerque became the second Governor of the State of India, a position he would hold until his death. Almeida having returned home in 1510,Almeida returned to Portugal five days later, but died in a skirmish with the Khoikhoi near the Cape of Good Hope. he speedily showed the energy and determination of his character.Andaya, Barbara Watson and Leonard Y. Andaya. (1984) A History of Malaysia "Palgrave" 376 pages. ISBN 0-312-38121-2.Albuquerque intended to dominate the Muslim world and control the Spice trade. 
Initially king Manuel I and his council in Lisbon tried to distribute the power, outlining three areas of jurisdiction in the Indian Ocean:Foundations of the Portuguese empire, 1415-1580, p. 245-247, Diffie, Winius in 1509 the nobleman Diogo Lopes de Sequeira was fitted with a fleet and sent to Southeast Asia, with the task of seeking an agreement with Sultan Mahmud Shah of Malacca, but failed and returned to the kingdom. To Jorge de Aguiar was given the area between the Cape of Good Hope and Gujarat, he was succeeded by Duarte de Lemos but left to Cochin and then for the kingdom, leaving his fleet to Albuquerque.
Conquest of Goa, 1510In January 1510, fulfilling the orders from the kingdom, and knowing of the absence of Zamorin, Albuquerque advanced on Calicut (now Kozhikode). The attack was unsuccessful as Marshal D. Fernando Coutinho, against instructions, ventured into the inner city fascinated by its richness, and suffered an ambush. During the rescue, Albuquerque received a severe wound and had to retreat.Foundations of the Portuguese empire, 1415-1580, p. 247, Diffie, WiniusSoon after the failed attack on Calicut, Albuquerque hastened to form a powerful fleet of twenty-three ships and 1200 men. Contemporary reports state that he wanted to fight the Egyptian Mameluke Sultanate fleet in the Red Sea or return to Hormuz. However, he had been informed by Timoji (a privateer in the service of the Hindu Vijayanagara Empire) that it would be easier to fight them in Goa, where they had sheltered after the Battle of Diu,Bhagamandala Seetharama Shastry, Charles J. Borges, "Goa-Kanara Portuguese relations, 1498-1763" p. 34-36 and also of the illness of the Sultan Yusuf Adil Shah and war between the Deccan sultanates.Bhagamandala Seetharama Shastry, Charles J. Borges, "Goa-Kanara Portuguese relations, 1498-1763" p. Borges, "Goa-Kanara Portuguese relations, 1498-1763" p. 34-36 34-36 So he invested by surprise in the capture of Goa to the Sultanate of Bijapur. He thus completed another mission, for Portugal wanted not to be seen as an eternal "guest" of Kochi and had been coveting Goa as the best trading port in the region.A first assault took place in Goa from March 4 to May 20, 1510. After initial occupation, feeling unable to hold the city given the poor condition of its fortifications, the cooling of Hindu population support and insubordination among his ranks following a severe attack by Ismail Adil Shah, Albuquerque refused a truce by the sultan and abandoned the city in August. His fleet was scattered and a palace revolt in Kochi hindered his recovery, so he headed to Fort Anjediva. New ships that now arrived from the kingdom were intended for the nobleman Diogo Mendes de Vasconcelos at Malacca, who had been given a rival command of the region.Only three months later, on November 25, Albuquerque reappeared in Goa with a renovated fleet, Diogo Mendes de Vasconcelos compelled to accompany him with the reinforcements for MalaccaFoundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415-1580, p. 253, Diffie, Winius 253, Diffie, Winius and about 300 Malabari reinforcements from Cannanore. In less than a day they took possession of Goa from Ismail Adil Shah and his Ottoman allies, who surrendered on 10 December. It is estimated that 6000 of the 9000 Muslim defenders of the city died, either on the fierce battle in the streets or drowned while trying to escape.Kerr, Robert (1824) Albuquerque regained the support of the Hindu population, although frustrating the initial expectations of Timoja, who aspired to become governor. Albuquerque rewarded him by appointing him chief "Aguazil" of the city, an administrator and representative of the Hindu and Muslim people, as a knowledgeable interpreter of the local customs. He then made an agreement to lower yearly dues. In Goa Albuquerque started the first Portuguese mint in the East, after complaints from merchants and Timoja about the scarcity of currency, taking it as an opportunity to announce the territorial conquest.Teotonio R. De Souza, "Goa Through the Ages: An economic history" p.220-221, Issue 6 of Goa University publication series, ISBN 8170222265 The new coin, based on the existing local coins, showed a cross on one side and the design of an armillary sphere (or "espera"), king Manuel's badge, on the other. Gold, silver and bronze coins were issued, respectively gold cruzados or manueis, esperas and alf-esperas, and "leais"."Commentarios do grande Afonso Dalboquerque", p.157Sebastião Rodolfo Dalgado,Joseph M. Piel, Glossário luso-asiático, Parte 1, p.382 http://books.google.pt/books?id=zOufgbY8TbsC&lpg=PA1&dq=bibliogroup%3A%22Gloss%C3%A1rio%20luso-asi%C3%A1tico%22&pg=PA1#v=onepage&q=&f=false Another mint was established at Malacca in 1511.Despite constant attacks, Goa became the centre of Portuguese India, with the conquest triggering the compliance of neighbouring kingdoms: the Sultan of Gujarat and the Zamorin of Calicut sent embassies, offering alliances and local grants to fortify.
Conquest of Malacca, 1511{{main}}

In February 1511, through a friendly Hindu merchant called Nina Chatu, Albuquerque received a letter from Rui de Araújo, one of the nineteen Portuguese held at Malacca since 1509. It urged moving forward with the largest possible fleet to demand their release, and gave details about the fortifications. Albuquerque showed it to Diogo Mendes de Vasconcelos, as an argument to advance in a joint fleet. In April 1511, after fortifying Goa, he gathered a force of about 900 Portuguese, 200 Hindu mercenaries and about eighteen ships.{{cite book}} He then set sail from Goa to Malacca, against the orders of the kingdom and under the protest of Diogo Mendes, who claimed the command of the expedition. Albuquerque eventually centralized the Portuguese government in the Indian Ocean. After the conquest of Malacca he wrote a letter to the King where he explained the disagreement with Diogo Mendes, suggesting that further divisions could be harmful to the Portuguese in India.Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415-1580, p. 255, Diffie, Winius Under his orders was Ferdinand Magellan, who had participated in the failed embassy of Diogo Lopes de Sequeira in 1509.After a false start towards the Red Sea, they sailed to the Strait of Malacca. It was the richest city that the Portuguese tried to take, and a focal point in the trade network where Malay traders met Gujarati, Chinese, Japanese, Javanese, Bengali, Persian and Arabic, among others, described by Tomé Pires as of invaluable richness. Despite its wealth, it was mostly a wooden-built city, with few masonry buildings but was defended by a mercenary force estimated at 20,000 men and more than 2000 pieces of artillery. Its greatest weakness being the unpopularity of the government of Sultan Mahmud Shah, who favoured Muslims producing dissatisfaction amongst other merchants. Albuquerque made a bold approach to the city, his ships decorated with banners, firing cannon volleys. He declared himself lord of all the navigation, demanding the Sultan release the prisoners, pay for the damage, and asking to build a fortified trading post. The Sultan eventually freed the prisoners, but was unimpressed by the small Portuguese contingent. Albuquerque then burned some ships at the port and four coastal buildings as a demonstration. The city being divided by the Malacca River, the connecting  bridge was a strategic point, so on 25 July at dawn the Portuguese landed and fought in tough battle, facing poisoned arrows, taking the bridge in the evening. After waiting for the reaction of the sultan, they returned to the ships. As the sultan did not respond, they prepared a junk offered by Chinese merchants, filling it with men, artillery, sandbags. Commanded by António de Abreu it sailed upriver at high tide onto the bridge, with success: the day after all had landed. After a fierce fight during which the sultan appeared with an army of war elephants, the defenders were dispersed and the sultan fled.Diffie, Bailey W. and George D. Winius, Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415–1580. p. 254-260 Albuquerque rested his men for a week and waited for the reaction of the Sultan. Merchants approached, asking for Portuguese protection. They were given banners to mark their premises, a sign that they would not be looted. On 15 August the Portuguese attacked again, but the Sultan had fled the city. Under firm orders they looted the city, respecting the banners.{{cite book}}Albuquerque remained in Malacca preparing its defences against any Malay counterattack, immediately building a fortress, distributing his men in shifts and using stones from the mosque and the cemetery. Despite the delays caused by heat and malaria, it was completed in November 1511, its surviving door known as "A Famosa" (the famous). It was possibly then that Albuquerque had a large stone engraved with the names of the participants in the conquest. To quell disagreements over the order of the names, Albuquerque had it set facing the wall, with the single inscription Lapidem quem reprobaverunt aedificantes (latin for "The stone the builders rejected", from prophecy of David, Psalm 118:22-23) on the front.Brás de Albuquerque, em Comentaries places this episode in Malacca, although Gaspar Correia (Lendas da Índia) and João de Barros (Décadas) placed it in GoaHe settled the Portuguese administration, reappointing Rui de Araújo as factor, a post assigned before his 1509 arrest, and appointing rich merchant Nina Chatu to replace the previous bendahara, representative of the Kafir people and adviser. Besides assisting in the governance of the city and first Portuguese coinage, he also provided the junks for several diplomatic missions.Teotonio R. De Souza, "Indo-Portuguese history: old issues, new questions", p. 60, Concept Publishing Company, 1985 Meanwhile, Albuquerque arrested and executed powerful Javanese merchant Utimuti Raja who, after being appointed to a position in the Portuguese administration as representative of the Javanese population, maintained contacts with the exiled royal family.
Missions from Malacca
Embassies to Pegu, Sumatra and Siam, 1511Most Muslim and Gujarati merchants having fled the city, Albuquerque now invested in diplomatic efforts demonstrating generosity to Southeast Asian merchants, like the Chinese, to encourage good relations with the Portuguese. Trade and diplomatic missions were sent to continental kingdoms: Rui Nunes da Cunha was sent to Pegu (Burma), from where king Binyaram sent back a friendly emissary to Kochi in 1514Manuel Teixeira, "The Portuguese missions in Malacca and Singapore (1511-1958)", Agência Geral do Ultramar, 1963Armando Cortesão, The Suma Oriental of Tomé Pires: an account of the east, from the Red Sea to Japan, written in Malacca and India in 1512–1515/The Book of Francisco Rodrigues rutter of a voyage in the Red Sea, nautical rules, almanack and maps, written and drawn in the east before 1515, The Hakluyt Society, 1944 and Sumatra, Sumatran kings of Kampar and Indragiri sending emissaries to Albuquerque accepting the new power, as vassal states of Malacca.Donald F. Lach, "Asia in the Making of Europe, Volume I: The Century of Discovery", p. 571, University of Chicago Press, 1994, ISBN 0226467317 Knowing of Siamese ambitions over Malacca, Albuquerque immediately sent Duarte Fernandes in a diplomatic mission to the Kingdom of Siam (Thailand), travelling in a Chinese junk returning home. He was one of the former Portuguese arrested in Malacca, having gathered knowledge about the culture of the region. There he was the first European to arrive, establishing amicable relations between the kingdom of Portugal and the court of the King of Siam Ramathibodi II, returning with a Siamese envoy bearing gifts and letters to Albuquerque and the king of Portugal.Donald Frederick Lach, Edwin J. Van Kley, "Asia in the making of Europe", p.520-521, University of Chicago Press, 1994, ISBN 9780226467313
Expedition to the "spice islands" (Maluku islands), 1512
In November, after having secured Malacca and learning the location of the then secret "spice islands", Albuquerque sent an expedition of three ships sailing east to find them, led by trusted António de Abreu with the deputy commander Francisco Serrão.A History of Modern Indonesia Since c.1300 Malay pilots were recruited to guide them through Java, the Lesser Sunda Islands and the Ambon Island to Banda Islands, where they arrived in early 1512.Hannard (1991),page 7;{{cite book}} There they remained for about a month, buying and filling their ships with nutmeg and cloves. António de Abreu then sailed to Amboina whilst Serrão stepped forward to the Moluccas but was shipwrecked near Seram. Sultan Abu Lais of Ternate heard of their stranding, and, seeing a chance to ally himself with a powerful foreign nation, brought them to Ternate in 1512 were they were permitted to build a fort on the island, {{belg}}, built in 1522.
China expeditions, 1513In early 1513, Jorge Álvares— sailing in a mission under Albuquerque — was allowed to land at Lintin Island in the Pearl River Delta of southern China, and soon after Albuquerque sent Rafael Perestrello to southern China to seek out trade relations with the Ming Dynasty of China. In ships from Portuguese Malacca, Rafael sailed to Canton (Guangzhou) in 1513 and again from 1515–1516 to trade with Chinese merchants there. These ventures, along with those of Tomé Pires and Fernão Pires de Andrade, were the first direct European diplomatic and commercial ties with China.However, after the death of the Chinese Zhengde Emperor on April 19, 1521, conservative factions at court seeking to limit eunuch influence rejected the new Portuguese embassy, fought sea battles with the Portuguese around Tuen Mun, and Tomé was forced to write letters to Malacca stating that he and other ambassadors would not be released from prison in China until the Portuguese relinquished their control of Malacca and returned it to the deposed Sultan of Malacca (who was previously a Ming tributary vassal). See Mote, Frederick W. and Denis Twitchett. (1998). The Cambridge History of China; Volume 7–8. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-24333-5 (Hardback edition). Page 340. Nonetheless, Portuguese relations with China became normalized again by the 1540s and in 1557 a permanent Portuguese base at Macau in southern China was established with consent from the Ming court.
Shipwreck on the Flor de la mar, 1511In 20 November 1511 Albuquerque sailed from Malacca to the coast of Malabar on board the old Flor de la mar carrack that had served to support the conquest of Malacca. Despite already being deemed unsafe, Afonso de Albuquerque used her to transport the treasure amassed in the conquest, given her large capacity:Diffie, Bailey W. and George D. Winius (1977). Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415–1580, p.260 he wanted to give the court of King Manuel I a show of Malaccan treasures. There were also the offers from the Kingdom of Siam (Thailand) to the king of Portugal and all his own fortune. On the voyage a storm arose and the Flor De La Mar was wrecked, and he himself barely escaped with his life. Albuquerque returned from Malacca to Kochi, but could not sail to Goa as it faced a serious revolt headed by the forces of Ismael Adil Shah, the Sultan of Bijapur, commanded by Rasul Khan with the help of some of his countrymen. While he was absent in Malacca, Portuguese who opposed the taking of Goa had waived the possession, even written to the king stating that it would be best to let it go. Held up by the monsoon and with few forces available, he had to wait for the arrival of reinforcement fleets headed by his nephew D. Garcia de Noronha and Jorge de Mello Pereira. On 10 September 1512, Albuquerque set sail from Cochin to Goa with fourteen ships carrying 1,700 soldiers. Determined to recapture the fortress, he ordered trenches to be dug and a wall to be breached. But on the very morning of the planned final assault, Rasul Khan surrendered. Albuquerque demanded the fort be handed with all its artillery, ammunition and horses, and the deserters to be given up. Some had joined Rasul Khan when the Portuguese were forced to flee Goa in May 1510, others during the recent siege. Rasul Khan consented, on condition that their lives be spared. Albuquerque agreed and he left Goa. Albuquerque kept his word, but mutilated them horribly. One of such renegades was Fernão Lopez, bound for Portugal in custody, who escaped at the island of Saint Helena leading a 'Robinson Crusoe' life for many years. After such measures the town became the most prosperous Portuguese settlement in India.
Return to the Red Sea, 1513In December 1512 an envoy from Ethiopia arrived at Goa. Mateus was sent by regent queen Eleni following the arrival of the Portuguese from Socotra in 1507, as an ambassador for the king of Portugal in search of a coalition to help face growing Ottoman influence. He was received in Goa with great honour by Albuquerque, as a long sought "Prester John" envoy. His arrival was announced by king Manuel I of Portugal to Pope Leo X in 1513. Although Mateus faced the distrust of some of Albuquerque rivals, who tried to prove he was some impostor or Muslim spy, Albuquerque sent him to Portugal.Francis Millet Rogers, "The quest for Eastern Christians: travels and rumor in the Age of Discovery", p. 134, U of Minnesota Press, 1962, ISBN 0816602751 The king is described as having wept with joy at their report. In February 1513, while Mateus was in Portugal, Albuquerque sailed to the Red Sea with a force of about 1000 Portuguese and 400 Malabaris. He was, from the start, under orders from the kingdom to secure that channel to Portugal. Barren Socotra had proved ineffective to control the Red Sea entrance and was abandoned, and Albuquerque's hint that Massawa could be a good Portuguese base might have been influenced by Mateus' reports.Diffie, Bailey W. and George D. Winius (1977). Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415–1580, p.352. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 0816607826 Knowing that mameluks were preparing a second fleet at Suez, he wanted to advance before reinforcements arrived to Aden. He accordingly laid siege to the city.By M. D. D. Newitt, "A history of Portuguese overseas expansion, 1400-1668", p.87, Routledge, 2005, ISBN 0415239796 Aden was a fortified city, but although having scaling ladders they broke and after half day of fierce battle Albuquerque was forced to retreat. They cruised the Red Sea inside the Bab al-Mandab, as the first European fleet to have sailed this route. Albuquerque attempted to reach Jeddah, but the winds were unfavourable and so sheltered at Kamaran island in May, until sickness among the men and lack of fresh water forced to retreat. In August 1513, after a second attempt to reach Aden, they returned to India with no substantial results. In order to destroy the power of Egypt, Albuquerque is said to have entertained the idea of diverting the course of the Nile River and so rendering the whole country barren. Perhaps most tellingly, he intended to steal the body of the Prophet Muhammad, and hold it for ransom until all Muslims had left the Holy Land.Andrew James McGregor, "A military history of modern Egypt: from the Ottoman Conquest to the Ramadan War", p.20, Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 9780275986018Afonso Braz de Albuquerque, "Commentaries of the Great Afonso Dalboquerque, Second Viceroy of India",Vol. 4,Walter de Gray Birch (Translator), ISBN 9781402195082
Administration and diplomacy in Goa, 1514
In 1514 Afonso de Albuquerque devoted himself to governing Goa, concluding peace with Calicut and receiving embassies from Indian governors, strengthening the city and stimulating the marriage of Portuguese with local women. At that time, Portuguese women were barred from travelling overseas due to superstition about women on ships, as well as the unsafe nature of the sea route. In 1511, the Portuguese government encouraged their explorers to marry local women, under a policy set by Albuquerque. To promote settlement, the King of Portugal granted freeman status and exemption from Crown taxes to Portuguese men (known as casados, or "married men") who ventured overseas and married local women. With Albuquerque's encouragement, mixed marriages flourished. He appointed local people for positions in the Portuguese administration and didn't interfere with local traditions, except "sati", the practice of immolating widows, which he forbade.In March 1514 King Manuel I of Portugal had sent to Pope Leo X a huge and exotic embassy led by Tristão da Cunha, who toured the streets of Rome in a extravagant procession of animals from the colonies and wealth from the Indies that struck Europe. His reputation reached its peak, laying foundations of the Portuguese Empire in the East. 
In early 1514, Afonso de Albuquerque had sent ambassadors to Sultan Muzafar II, ruler of Cambay, to seek permission to build a fort on Diu. The mission returned without an agreement, but diplomatic gifts were exchanged, including an Indian rhinoceros.Bedini, p.112. Albuquerque sent the gift, named ganda, and its Indian keeper, Ocem, to King Manuel I.História do famoso rhinocerus de Albrecht Dürer, Projecto Lambe-Lambe {{pt icon}}. In late 1515, the king sent it as a gift , the famous Dürer's Rhinoceros to Pope Leo X. Dürer never saw the actual rhinoceros, which was the first living example seen in Europe since Roman times.
Conquest of Ormuz and last days, 1515In 1513 at Cannanore Albuquerque was visited by a Persian ambassador from shah Ismail I, who had sent ambassadors to Gujarat, Ormuz and Bijapur. The shah's ambassador to Bijapur visited Albuquerque inviting him to send back an envoy to Persia. Miguel Ferreira was sent via Ormuz to Tabriz, were he had several interviews with the Shah about common goals on defeating the Mameluke sultan. Having returned with rich presents and an ambassador, on the journey back in March 1515 they were met by Albuquerque at Ormuz, where he went to establish his rule.John Holland Rose, Arthur Percival Newton, Ernest Alfred Benians, "The Cambridge history of the British empire, Volume 2", p. 12, CUP Archive, 1959 Fueled by the offers of the shah, Albuquerque had decided to recapture Ormuz. He had learned that after the Portuguese retreat in 1507, a young king was reigning under the influence of a powerful Persian vizier, Reis Hamed, whom the king greatly feared. At Hormuz, Albuquerque had a parley with the king and asked the vizier to be present. He then had him immediately stabbed and killed by his entourage, thus "freeing" the dominated king so the island in the Persian Gulf yielded to him without resistance, and remained a Portuguese vassal state until 1622. There Albuquerque stood, engaging in diplomatic efforts and receiving envoys while becoming increasingly ill. In November 1515 he decided to return, but he didn't survived the journey, dying off Goa.
Political downfallAlbuquerque's career had a painful and ignominious close. He had several enemies at the Portuguese court who lost no opportunity of stirring up the jealousy of King Manuel against him, insinuating that he intended to strike power in Portuguese India, and his own injudicious and arbitrary conduct on several occasions served their end only too well. On his return from Ormuz, at the entrance of the harbour of Goa, he got news about a fleet arriving from Europe bearing dispatches announcing that he was superseded by his personal enemy Lopo Soares de Albergaria. The blow was too much for him and he died at sea on December 16, 1515.{{cite book}} Before his death Albuquerque dictated a letter to King Manuel I in dignified and affecting terms, vindicating his conduct and claiming for his natural son the honours and rewards that were justly due to himself.  Albergaria had departed from Lisbon in 7 April 1515, along with Mateus and a returning embassy to Ethiopia. Yet in August, through contacts in Venice, King Manuel I learnt that the Mamluk Sultan of Cairo had prepared a fleet at Suez with men and artillery to fight the Portuguese in India and, especially, in Hormuz. Fearing the effects and repenting his replacement of Albuquerque, he hurriedly wrote to Albergaria to return the command of all operations to Albuquerque, and to provide him with resources so that he could fight the rival forces. However when the letter arrived, Albuquerque had already died.Albuquerque, Brás de (1774). Commentarios do grande Afonso Dalboquerque, parte IV", p.200-206 His body was buried in Goa according to his will, in the Church of Nossa Senhora da Serra (Our Lady of the Hill), built in 1513 thanking for his escape from Kamaran island.This Church was later demolished between 1811 and 1842, in Manoel José Gabriel Saldanha, "História de Goa:(política e arqueológica)", p.145, ISBN 812060590X After 51 years, in 1566, he was moved to Nossa Senhora da Graça church in Lisbon,Bibliotheca Lusitana, Diogo Barbosa Machado, Tomo I, página 23 which was ruined and rebuilt after the 1755 earthquake.
Legacy
King Manuel I of Portugal was convinced too late of Albuquerque's loyalty, and endeavoured to atone for the ingratitude with which he had treated him by heaping honours upon his son, Brás de Albuquerque (1500—1580).,Stier, Hans Erich (1942) Die Welt als Geschichte: Zeitschrift für Universalgeschichte "W. Kohlhammer". whom he renamed "Afonso" in memory of his father.  Afonso de Albuquerque was a prolific writer, having written numerous letters to the king reporting all kind of matters during his governorship, from minor issues to major strategies. In 1557 his son  published a collection his letters under the title Commentarios do Grande Affonso d'Alboquerque.Forbes, Jack D. (1993) Africans and Native Americans "University of Illinois Press". 344 pages. ISBN 0-252-06321-X.- a clear reference to Caesar's Commentaries- which he later reviewed and re-published in 1576. There Albuquerque was described as "a man of middle stature, with a long face, fresh colored, the nose somewhat large. He was a prudent man, and a Latin scholar, and spoke in elegant phrases; his conversation and writings showed his excellent education. He was of ready words, very authoritative in his commands, very circumspect in his dealings with the Moors, and greatly feared yet greatly loved by all, a quality rarely found united in one captain. He was very valiant and favored by fortune."Albuquerque, Brás, Commentaries, vol VI, p. 198In 1572 Albuquerque's feats were inscribed in The Lusiads, the Portuguese main epic poem by Luís Vaz de Camões (Canto X, strophe 40 to 49), where the poet praises his achievements but has the muses frown upon the harsh rule towards his own men, of whom Camões was almost a contemporary fellow. In 1934 Albuquerque was celebrated by Fernando Pessoa in Mensagem, a symbolist epic. In the first part of this work, called "Brasão" (Coat-of-Arms), he relates Portuguese historical protagonists to each of the fields in the Portuguese coat-of-arms, Albuquerque being one of the wings of the griffin headed by Henry the navigator, the other wing being King John II. An exquisite and expensive variety of mango, that he used to bring on his journeys to India, has been named in his honour, and is today sold throughout the world as Alphonso mangoes.{{cite web}}Despite his fame, the city of Albuquerque in New Mexico is not named after him.  It was named after a Spanish Viceroy of Mexico named Don Francisco Fernández de la Cueva, who also held the title Duke of Alburquerque.  There is, however, a town near the Spanish-Portuguese border named Alburquerque which may be the root of both names.
Additionally, it is highly likely that one of the major thoroughfares in Malacca's Portuguese Settlement, Jalan D'Albuquerque, is named after Afonso de Albuquerque.
References{{Reflist}}
Bibliography{{Refbegin}}

Albuquerque, Braz de (1774). Commentarios do grande Afonso Dalboquerque. Lisbon: Na Regia Officina Typografica. Available in English as The Commentaries of the Great Afonso Dalboquerque, Second Viceroy of India. Laurier Books Ltd. /AES 2000. ISBN 978-8120615144
Albuquerque, Afonso de, D. Manuel I, António Baião, "Cartas para el-rei d. Manuel I" (Albuquerque letters to the king, in Portuguese), Editora Livraria Sá de Costa, 1957
{{cite book}} (volume 6, I chapter)
H. Morse Stephens, "Albuquerque", New Delhi: Asian Educational Services, (1892)2000, ISBN 8120615247
Danvers, Frederick Charles (1894). The Portuguese in India. London: W. H. Allen. ISBN 978-1-4021-5080-7
Diffie, Bailey W. and George D. Winius (1977). Foundations of the Portuguese Empire, 1415–1580. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 0816607826.
Marques, A. H. de Oliveira (1972). History of Portugal, 2nd ed. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 023108353X.
M. D. D. Newitt, "A history of Portuguese overseas expansion, 1400-1668", Routledge, 2005, ISBN 041523980X
Panikkar, K. M. (1929). Malabar and the Portuguese: Being a History of the Relations of the Portuguese with Malabar from 1500 to 1663. Bombay: D.B. Taraporevala Sons. ASIN B000878T7Q.
Sanceau, Elaine &#34;Indies adventure: the amazing career of Afonso de Albuquerque, captain-general and governor of India (1509-1515)&#34;, Blackie, 1936
{{Refend}}
External links{{commons category}}
{{Wikisource1911Enc}}

{{1911}} The article is available here:{{cite web}}
Catholic Encyclopedia article
Paul Lunde, The coming of the Portuguese, 2006, Saudi Aramco World
{{Succession}}{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Albuquerque, Alfonso D'}}












{{Link FA}}ar:??????? ?? ????????
bg:?????? ?? ?????????
ca:Afonso de Albuquerque
cs:Afonso de Albuquerque
de:Afonso de Albuquerque
et:Afonso de Albuquerque
es:Afonso de Albuquerque
eo:Afonso de Albuquerque
fa:??????? ? ???????
fr:Afonso de Albuquerque
gl:Afonso de Albuquerque
id:Afonso de Albuquerque
it:Alfonso de Albuquerque
he:?????? ?? ????????
jv:Alfonso de Albuquerque
la:Alphonsus de Albuquerque
mr:??????? ?? ?????????
ms:Alfonso de Albuquerque
mwl:Afonso de Albuquerque
nl:Afonso de Albuquerque
ja:??????????????
no:Afonso de Albuquerque
pl:Afonso de Albuquerque
pt:Afonso de Albuquerque
ro:Afonso de Albuquerque
ru:?????????, ?????? ??
sl:Afonso de Albuquerque
sr:?????? ?? ????????
fi:Afonso de Albuquerque
sv:Afonso de Albuquerque
uk:?????? ?'?????????
war:Afonso de Albuquerque
zh:???·?·??????