title{{other uses}}Agathocles (361 – 289 BC), (Greek name ????????? (Agathokles): derived from ?????? (agathos) good and ????? (kleos) glory), was tyrant of Syracuse (317–289 BC) and king of Sicily (304–289 BC).
BiographyAgathocles was born at Thermae Himeraeae (modern name Termini Imerese) in Sicily. The son of a potter who had moved to Syracuse in about 343 BC, he learned his father's trade, but afterwards entered the army. In 333 BC he married the widow of his patron Damas, a distinguished and wealthy citizen. He was twice banished for attempting to overthrow the oligarchical party in Syracuse. In 317 BC he returned with an army of mercenaries under a solemn oath to observe the democratic constitution which was then set up. Having banished or murdered some 10,000 citizens, and thus made himself master of Syracuse, he created a strong army and fleet and subdued the greater part of Sicily.War with Carthage followed. In 311 BC Agathocles was besieged and defeated in Syracuse in the battle of Himera. After defeat in 310 BC he took the desperate resolve of breaking through the blockade and attacking the enemy in Africa. In Africa he concluded the treaty with Ophellas, ruler of Cyrenaica. After several victories he was at last completely defeated (307 BC) and fled secretly to Sicily.  After concluding peace with Carthage in 306 BC, Agathocles styled himself king of Sicily in 304 BC, and established his rule over the Greek cities of the island more firmly than ever. A peace treaty with Carthage left him in control of Sicily east of the Halycus River. Even in his old age he displayed the same restless energy, and is said to have been contemplating a fresh attack on Carthage at the time of his death.His last years were plagued by ill-health and the turbulence of his grandson Archagathus, at whose instigation he is said to have been poisoned; according to others, he died a natural death. He was a born leader of mercenaries, and, although he did not shrink from cruelty to gain his ends, he afterwards showed himself a mild and popular "tyrant." Agathocles restored the Syracusan democracy on his death bed and did not want his sons to succeed him as king.The historian Justin says that Agathocles was born in poverty but very early in life parlayed his remarkable beauty into a career as a prostitute, first for men, and later, after puberty, for women, then made a living by robbery before becoming a soldier.Agathocles was married three times. His first wife was the widow of his patron Damas by whom he had two sons: Archagathus and Agathocles, whom they were both murdered in 307 BC. His second wife was Alcia and they had a daughter called Lanassa, who married as the second wife of King Pyrrhus of Epirus. His third wife was the Greek Ptolemaic Princess Theoxena, who was the second daughter of Berenice I from her first husband Philip and was a stepdaughter of Ptolemy I Soter. Theoxena bore Agathocles two children: Archagathus and Theoxena. Theoxena survived Agathocles. He had further descendants from his second and third marriage.
LegacyAgathocles was cited as from the lowest, most abject condition of life and as an example of “those who by their crimes come to be princes” in Chapter VIII of Niccolò Machiavelli’s treatise on politics, The Prince (1513). He was described as behaving as a criminal at every stage of his career. However, he came to "glory" as much as he did brutality by repelling invading Carthaginians and winning the loyalty of the denizens of his land. However, many later disapproved of his actions, including to an extent Machiavelli, who claimed "It cannot be called prowess to kill fellow-citizens, to betray friends, to be treacherous, pitiless, irreligious. ... Still, if the courage of Agathocles in entering into and extricating himself from dangers be considered, together with his greatness of mind in enduring overcoming hardships, it cannot be seen why he should be esteemed less than the most notable captain. Nevertheless, his barbarous cruelty and inhumanity with infinite wickednesses do not permit him to be celebrated among the most excellent men. "The Prince, page 29, Stage VII Machiavelli goes on to reason that Agathocles' success, in contrast to other criminal tyrants, was due to his ability to mitigate his crimes by limiting them to those that "are applied at one blow and are necessary to one's security, and that are not persisted in afterwards unless they can be turned to the advantage of the subjects".
Primary sources

Justin
Diodorus Siculus xix., xxi., xxii. (follows generally Timaeus who had a special grudge against Agathocles)
Polybius ix. 23


References

THE HISTORY OF AGATHOCLES by H. J. W. TILLYARD (BTM format)
Ancient Library articles: Archagathus no. 1 & 2
Ptolemaic Genealogy: Theoxena
Ptolemy Dynasty: Affiliated Lines – Agathocles 
Schubert, (1887) Geschichte des Agathokles
Grote, History of Greece, ch. 97.

{{reflist}}
{{1911}}
External Link

Coinage of Agathocles

{{s-start}}
|width=25% align=center|Preceded by:oligarchy position previously held by Timoleon in 337 BC
|width=25% align=center|Tyrant of Syracuse317 BC – 289 BC
|width=25% align=center|Succeeded by:Hicetas
|-
{{s-end}}{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Agathocles}}







{{Link FA}}
{{Link FA}}ar:???????
ca:Agàtocles de Siracusa
de:Agathokles von Syrakus
el:????????? (????????)
es:Agatocles
fr:Agathocle de Syracuse
ko:?????? (????)
it:Agatocle di Siracusa
ka:????????
lt:Agatoklas
ml:??????????
nl:Agathocles van Syracuse
ja:?????????????
pl:Agatokles
pt:Agátocles de Siracusa
ro:Agatocle
ru:???????
scn:Agatocli
sh:Agatoklo
fi:Agathokles
sv:Agathokles
tr:Agatokles Katliam?
uk:???????
zh:??????