title{{Other uses}}
{{Refimprove}}
{{Infobox Hindu deity}}Agni ({{lang-sa}}) is a Hindu deity, one of the most important of the Vedic gods. He is the god of fireMythology, An Illustrated Encyclopedia of the Principal Myths and Religions of the World, by Richard Cavendish ISBN 1-84056-070-3, 1998 and the acceptor of sacrifices. The sacrifices made to Agni go to the deities because Agni is a messenger from and to the other gods. He is ever-young, because the fire is re-lit every day, and also immortal. Agni, the Vedic god of fire, has two heads, one marks immortality and the other marks an unknown symbol of life has made the transition into the Hindu pantheon of gods, without losing his importance. With Varuna and Indra he is one of the supreme gods in the Rig Veda. The link between heaven and earth, the deities and the humans, he is associated with Vedic sacrifice, taking offerings to the other world in his fire. In Hinduism, his vehicle is the ram.Bowker, John. World Religions. New York: DK Publishing, Inc. 1997
EtymologyThe word agni is Sanskrit for "fire" (noun), cognate with Latin ignis (the root of English ignite), Russian ????? (ogon), Polish "ogie?", and Lithuanian ugnis—all with the meaning "fire", with the reconstructed Proto-Indo-European root being h?égni-. Agni has three forms: fire, lightning and the sun.Agni, the Vedic God of Fire
In the Vedas{{Classic element}}
Agni is the first word of the first hymn of the Rigveda:
{{lang}}{{IAST}}Agni I laud, the high priest, god, minister of sacrifice, The invoker, lavishest of wealth.
He is the supreme director of religious ceremonies and duties, and figures as messenger between mortals and gods. Vedic rituals all involve Agni, for example the elaborate Agnicayana, that is, the piling of the fire altar, the Agnihotra, viz., offering to Agni.The Rigveda often says that Agni arises from water or dwells in the waters. He may have originally been the same as Apam Napat, who is also sometimes described as fire arising from water which in a natural explanation may have referred to flames from natural gas or oil seepages surfacing through water. Other Rigvedic names, epithets or aspects of Agni include Matarishvan, Jatavedas, or Bharata.Agni is a deva, second only to Indra in the power and importance attributed to him in Vedic mythology, with 218 out of 1,028 hymns of the Rigveda dedicated to him. He is Indra's twin, and therefore a son of Dyaus Pita and Prthivi. However, he is also said to have two mothers {{cite book}}  (the two parts of the firedrill used to start the fire), and ten servant maids (the fingers of the man who is lighting the fire) or as the twice-born.Rig Veda 1.149.4 ibid p.43 He is one of the Guardians of the directions, representing the southeast. Agni, god of fire  acts as the divine model for the sacrificial priest.  He is the messenger who carries the oblation from humans to the gods, bringing the gods to sacrifice, and interceding between gods and humans (RgV.1.26.3).  When Agni is pleased, the gods are generous.  Agni represents the cultivated, cooked and cultured aspects of Vedic ritual.  Together with Soma, Agni is invoked in the Rig Veda more than any other gods.Doniger, Wendy, The Hindus, an Alternative History, Oxford University Press, 2010, ISBN 978-0-19-959334 (Pbk)In a later Hindu interpretation, Agni stands for knowledge for it is seen by the learned people, covering all things that move and do not move {{cite book}} and because it summons the Devatas endowed with knowledge Rig Veda 1.44.7 ibid p.42 the light Agni emits is the light of knowledge. Therefore, it is also known as the illuminator of knowledge who lights up the path leading to Truth. Agni reveals the true nature of one's own self {{cite book}} because it is the innermost light that shines ever so brightly in all things living and nonliving as their inner consciousness (impeller).{{cite book}}
Depictions
In Hindu scriptures, Agni is depicted with two or seven hands, two heads and three legs. He has seven fiery tongues with which he licks sacrificial butter. He rides a ram or in a chariot harnessed by fiery horses. His attributes are an axe, torch, prayer beads and a flaming spear.The Book of Hindu Imagery: Gods, Manifestations and Their Meaning By Eva Rudy Jansen p. 64  Agni is represented as red and two-faced, suggesting both his destructive and beneficent qualities, and with black eyes and hair, three legs and seven arms. He rides a ram, or a chariot pulled by goats or, more rarely, parrots. Seven rays of light emanate from his body. One of his names is Saptajihva, "having seven tongues". Another one of his epithets is Abhimani (from Sanskrit: abhi towards + the verbal root man to think, reflect upon) meaning dignified, proud; Longing for, thinking upon.
LegendsAgni is the eldest son of Brahma. In Visnu Purana, Agni (Abhimani) the fire god is said to have sprung from the mouth of the Virat purusha, the Cosmic Man. His wife is Svaha. Abhimani had three sons of surpassing brilliancy: Pavaka, Pavamana, and Suchi, the personifications of the three fires that produced our earth and humanity (VP 1:10).Google Books All these three names indicate purity. Abhimanin, his three sons, and their 45 sons constitute the mystic 49 fires of the Puranas and theosophy. (cf Agni Purana.)His three sons, according to the Vayu Purana, stand for three different aspects of Agni (fire): Pavaka is the electric fire, Pavamana the fire produced by friction, and Suchi the solar fire. Interpreted on the cosmic and human planes, these three fires are "Spirit, Soul, and Body, the three great Root groups, with their four additional divisions" (SD 2:247). They are said to have been cursed by the sage Vasishtha to be born again and again (cf BP 4:24,4; SD 2:247-8). "Every fire has a distinct function and meaning in the worlds of the physical and the spiritual. It has, moreover, in its essential nature a corresponding relation to one of the human psychic faculties, besides its well determined chemical and physical potencies when coming in contact with the terrestrially differentiated matter" (SD 1:521).Agni is also an important entity in Ayurveda. It is considered to be the one which is responsible for the sustenance of life. Agni helps in the various physiological functions of the body.{{Citation needed}}In some Hindu symbolism, Agni's parents are said to be the two components of the firedrill used to start the fire, and when young he was said to be cared for by ten servants, which represent the fingers of the man who is starting the fire.
In other religionsIn Newar, Tibetan and Japanese Buddhism, he is a lokap?la guarding the Southeast. Jigten lugs kyi bstan bcos: which translates, "Make your hearth in the southeast corner of the house, which is the quarter of Agni". He also plays a central role in most Buddhist homa fire-puja rites. A typical praise to Agni starts  "Son of Brahma, Lord of the World, King of fire gods empowered by Takki, Whose supreme wisdom burns all delusion [...]" A Manual of Ritual Fire offerings p20, Sharpa Tulku / Michael Perrott LTWA, 1987 ISBN 81-85102-66-X
See also

Apris
Atar (Zoroastrian yazata of fire)
Hindu deities


References

{{Rigveda}}
{{Hindu Deities and Texts}}
{{Indian Philosophy}}










als:Agni
ar:????
bn:?????
be:????
bg:????
bs:Agni
ca:Agni
cy:Agni
de:Agni
et:Agni
es:Agni
eo:Agni
eu:Agni
fa:????
fr:Agni (dieu)
ko:???
id:Agni
it:Agni
jv:Agni
ka:????
lv:Agni
lt:Agnis
ml:?????????
mr:????? (?????)
nl:Agni
ja:???
no:Agni
nn:Agni
or:?????
pa:????
pl:Agni
pt:Agni
ro:Agni
ru:????
sa:??????
si:????? (???????)
sk:Agni
sl:Agni
sr:????
fi:Agni
sv:Agni
ta:????? ?????
te:????? (??????)
th:????????
tr:Agni
uk:????
zh:???