title{{Infobox Occupation}}
Agricultural science is a broad multidisciplinary field that encompasses the parts of exact, natural, economic and social sciences that are used in the practice and understanding of agriculture. (Veterinary science, but not animal science, is often excluded from the definition.)
Agriculture and agricultural science
The two terms are often confused. However, they cover different concepts:

Agriculture is the set of activities that transform the environment for the production of animals and plants for human use. Agriculture concerns techniques, including the application of agronomic research.
Agronomy is research and development related to studying and improving plant-based agriculture.

Agricultural sciences include research and development on:

Production techniques (e.g., irrigation management, recommended nitrogen inputs)
Improving agricultural productivity in terms of quantity and quality (e.g., selection of drought-resistant crops and animals, development of new pesticides, yield-sensing technologies, simulation models of crop growth, in-vitro cell culture techniques)
Transformation of primary products into end-consumer products (e.g., production, preservation, and packaging of dairy products)
Prevention and correction of adverse


Agricultural science: a local science
With the exception of theoretical agronomy, research in agronomy, more than in any other field, is strongly related to local areas. It can be considered a science of ecoregions, because it is closely linked to soil properties and climate, which are never exactly the same from one place to another. Many people think an agricultural production system relying on local weather, soil characteristics, and specific crops has to be studied locally. Others feel a need to know and understand production systems in as many areas as possible, and the human dimension of interaction with nature.
History of agricultural science{{Main}}Agricultural science began with Gregor Mendeliz's genetic work, but in modern terms might be better dated from the chemical fertilizer outputs of plant physiological understanding in eighteenth century Germany.{{Citation needed}} In the United States, a scientific revolution in agriculture began with the Hatch Act of 1887, which used the term "agricultural science". The Hatch Act was driven by farmers' interest in knowing the constituents of early artificial fertilizer. The Smith-Hughes Act of 1917 shifted agricultural education back to its vocational roots, but the scientific foundation had been built.Hillison J. (1996). The Origins of Agriscience: Or Where Did All That Scientific Agriculture Come From?. Journal of Agricultural Education. After 1906, public expenditures on agricultural research in the US exceeded private expenditures for the next 44 years.Huffman WE, Evenson RE. (2006). Science for Agriculture. Blackwell Publishing.{{rp}}Intensification of agriculture since the 1960s in developed and developing countries, often referred to as the Green Revolution, was closely tied to progress made in  selecting and improving crops and animals for high productivity, as well as to developing additional inputs such as artificial fertilizers and phytosanitary products.As the oldest and largest human intervention in nature, the environmental impact  of agriculture in general and more recently intensive agriculture, industrial development, and population growth have raised many questions among agricultural scientists and have led to the development and emergence of new fields. These include technological fields  that assume the solution to technological problems lies in better technology, such as integrated pest management, waste treatment technologies, landscape architecture, genomics, and agricultural philosophy fields that include references to food production as something essentially different from non-essential economic 'goods'. In fact, the interaction between these two approaches provide a fertile field for deeper understanding in agricultural science.New technologies, such as biotechnology and computer science (for data processing and storage), and technological advances have made it possible to develop new research fields, including genetic engineering, agrophysics, improved statistical analysis, and precision farming. Balancing these, as above, are the natural and human sciences of agricultural science that seek to understand the human-nature interactions of traditional agriculture, including interaction of religion and agriculture, and the non-material components of agricultural production systems.
Prominent agricultural scientists

Justus von Liebig
Jethro Tull
Robert Bakewell
Norman Borlaug
Luther Burbank
George Washington Carver
René Dumont
Jay Lush
Gregor Mendel
Kailas Nath Kaul
Louis Pasteur
Eli Whitney
Sewall Wright
Scott Hill


Agricultural science and agriculture crisisAgriculture sciences seek to feed the world's population while preventing biosafety problems that may affect human health and the environment. This requires promoting good management of natural resources and respect for the environment, and increasingly concern for the psychological wellbeing of all concerned in the food production and consumption system.Economic, environmental, and social aspects of agriculture sciences are subjects of ongoing debate. Recent crises (such as avian influenza, mad cow disease and issues such as the use of genetically modified organisms) illustrate the complexity and importance of this debate.
Fields or related disciplines{{Col-begin}}
{{Col-break}}

Agricultural diversification
Agricultural economics
Agricultural engineering
Agricultural geography
Agricultural philosophy
Agricultural marketing
Agrophysics
Animal science
Animal breeding
Animal nutrition
Agronomy
Plant science
Theoretical production ecology
Horticulture
Plant breeding
Plant fertilization
{{Col-break}}

Aquaculture
Biological engineering
Genetic engineering
Microbiology
Environmental science
Food science
Human nutrition
Irrigation and water management
Soil science
Agrology
Waste management
{{Col-end}}
See also

Agriculture ministry
Agricultural sciences basic topics
Agroecology
American Society of Agronomy
Genomics of domestication
List of agriculture topics
History of agricultural science
Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences
International Assessment of Agricultural Science and Technology for Development
International Food Policy Research Institute, IFPRI
Research Institute of Crop Production (RICP) (in the Czech Republic)
University of Agricultural Sciences
National FFA Organization


Further reading

Agricultural Research, Livelihoods, and Poverty: Studies of Economic and Social Impacts in Six Countries Edited by Michelle Adato and Ruth Meinzen-Dick (2007), Johns Hopkins University Press  Food Policy Reporthttp://www.ifpri.org/publication/agricultural-research-livelihoods-and-poverty
Claude Bourguignon, Regenerating the Soil: From Agronomy to Agrology, Other India Press, 2005
Pimentel David, Pimentel Marcia, Computer les kilocalories, Cérès, n. 59, sept-oct. 1977
Russell E. Walter, Soil conditions and plant growth, Longman group, London, New York 1973
Salamini Francesco, Oezkan Hakan, Brandolini Andrea, Schaefer-Pregl Ralf, Martin William, Genetics and geography of wild cereal domestication in the Near East, in Nature, vol. 3, ju. 2002
Saltini Antonio, Storia delle scienze agrarie, 4 vols, Bologna 1984-89, ISBN 88-206-2412-5, ISBN 88-206-2413-3, ISBN 88-206-2414-1, ISBN 88-206-2414-X 
Vavilov Nicolai I. (Starr Chester K. editor), The Origin, Variation, Immunity and Breeding of Cultivated Plants. Selected Writings, in Chronica botanica, 13: 1-6, Waltham, Mass., 1949-50
Vavilov Nicolai I., World Resources of Cereals, Leguminous Seed Crops and Flax, Academy of Sciences of Urss, National Science Foundation, Washington, Israel Program for Scientific Translations, Jerusalem 1960
Winogradsky Serge, Microbiologie du sol. Problèmes et methodes. Cinquante ans de recherches, Masson &#38; c.ie, Paris 1949


References{{reflist}}
External links

Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR)
Agricultural Research Service
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture
International Livestock Research Institute
The National Agricultural Library (NAL) - The most comprehensive agricultural library in the world.
Crop Science Society of America
American Society of Agronomy
Soil Science Society of America
Agricultural Science Researchers, Jobs and Discussions
Information System for Agriculture and Food Research
South Dakota Agricultural Laboratories


{{DEFAULTSORT:Agricultural Science}}
be-x-old:?????????
bg:??????? ?????
da:Agronomi
de:Agrarwissenschaften
es:Agronomía
fa:??? ???????
fr:Agronomie
hi:???? ???????
it:Agronomia
he:?????????
nl:Landbouwkunde
ja:??
pl:Agronomia
pt:Ciências agrárias
ru:?????????
fi:Maataloustiede
sv:Lantbruksvetenskap
th:???????????
zh:????