title{{Tone}}

Aircraft spotting  or plane spotting is the observation and logging of the registration numbers of aircraft: gliders, powered aircraft, balloons, airships, helicopters, and microlights.When spotting aircraft, observers notice the key attributes of an aircraft.  They may notice a distinctive noise from its engine or the number of vapour trails it is leaving.  They will assess the size of the aircraft and the number, type and position of its engines.  Another clue  is the position of wings relative to the fuselage and the degree to which they are swept rearwards.  Are the wings above the fuselage, below it, or fixed at midpoint?  Perhaps it is a monoplane, biplane, or triplane.  The position of the tailplane relative to the fin(s) and the shape of the fin are also clues to its type.  If it is an antique or light aircraft it might have a tail wheel.  Some aircraft types have a fixed undercarriage while others have retractable wheels. Other features include the speed, cockpit placement, colour scheme or special equipment that changes the silhouette of the aircraft.  Taken together these clues will enable the identification of an aircraft.  If the observer is familiar with the airfield being used by the aircraft and its normal traffic patterns, he or she is more likely to leap quickly to a decision about the aircraft's identity - they may have seen the same type of aircraft from the same angle many times.Due to technical development, more and more spotters are using equipment like radar decoders to track the movements of aircraft. The two most famous devices used are the AirNav Systems RadarBox and Kinetic Avionics SBS series. Both of them are reading and processing the radar data and show the movements on a computer screen. Most of the decoders also allow to export logs from a certain route or airport."Plane Spotters at Dublin Airport" Austrian Aviation Net, 30 April 2011. Retrieved: 2 Mai 2011. The video shows a spotter who is observing the movements at Dublin Airport, including a screenshot of a SBS Box
Spotting styles
Some spotters will note and compile the markings, a national insignia or airline livery or logo perhaps, a squadron badge or code letters in the case of a military aircraft.  Published manuals allow more information to be deduced, such as the delivery date or the manufacturer's construction number.  Camouflage markings differ, depending on the surroundings in which that aircraft is expected to operate.In general, most spotters attempt to see as many aircraft of a given type (ie: Boeing 747), a particular airline (Cathay Pacific for example)or a particular subset of aircraft such as business jets (a.k.a Biz Jets), Commercial Airliners, Military and/or general aviation. Some spotters attempt to see every airframe and are known as "frame spotters". Others are keen to see every registration worn by each aircraft. Ancillary activities might include listening-in to air traffic transmissions (using radio scanners, where that is legal), liaising with other "spotters" to clear up uncertainties as to what aircraft have been seen at specific times or in particular places. Several internet mailing list groups have been formed to help communicate aircraft seen at airports, queries and anomalies. These groups can cater to certain regions (North American Spotters), certain aircraft types (The Biz List) or may appeal to a wider audience such as the Civil Spotters group. Many of these groups originated from the original Oxford.vax group which pioneered this type of communication. The result is that information on aircraft movements can be delivered worldwide in a real-time fashion to spotters.The hobbyist might travel long distances to visit a different airport from their usual one, to see an unusual aircraft or to view the remains of aircraft withdrawn from use.  Some aircraft may be placed in the care of museums (see Aviation archaeology) - or perhaps be cannibalized in order to repair a similar aircraft already preserved. Aircraft registrations can be found in books, with online resources or in monthly magazines from enthusiast groups. Most spotters maintained books of different aircraft fleets and would underline or check each aircraft seen. Each year, a revised version of the books would be published and the spotter would be forced to re-underline every aircraft seen. With the development of several aircraft databases (Airline Data Unlimited, Aviation Databases, Quantum Aerodata etc.) , the spotter was finally able to record their sightings in an electronic database and produce reports that emulated the underlined books.
During hostilitiesDuring World War II and the subsequent Cold War some countries encouraged their citizens to become "plane spotters" in an "observation corps" or similar public body for reasons of public security.  Britain had the Royal Observer Corps which operated between 1925 and 1995.  A journal called The Aeroplane Spotter was published in January 1940.  The publication included a glossary that was refined in 2010 and published online (see http://www.aeroplanemonthly.co.uk/glossary/)
Air showsAir shows usually draw large numbers of spotters as it is a chance to enter airfields and air bases worldwide that are usually closed to the public and to see displayed aircraft at close range. The most popular event in Europe is the Royal International Air Tattoo in the United Kingdom.{{CN}}
Legal ramifications
The legal repercussions of the hobby were dramatically shown in November 2001 when fourteen aircraft spotters (twelve British, two Dutch) were arrested by Greek police after being observed at an open day at the Greek Air Force base at Kalamata. They were charged with espionage, and faced a possible 20-year prison sentence if found guilty. After being held for six weeks, they were eventually released on £9,000 bail, and the charges reduced to the misdemeanour charge of illegal information collection. Confident of their innocence they returned for their trial in April 2002 and were stunned to be found guilty, with eight of the group sentenced to three years, the rest for one year. At their appeal a year later all were acquitted ."Plane-spotters 'ignored warnings'." BBC News, 25 April 2002. Retrieved: 14 March 2007. Quote: "Note-taking in conjunction with other activities may be detrimental (to Greek security).""Greek court convicts plane-spotters." BBC News, 26 April 2002. Retrieved: 14 March 2007. Quote: "The verdict bears no relation whatsoever to the evidence given.""How did plane-spotters end up as spies?" BBC News, 26 April 2002. Retrieved: 14 March 2007. Quote: "I would warn that spotting in Greece is still not particularly liked by the authorities and without our contacts at the Greek Ministry of Defence, which helped on a number of occasions, the trip might have been a little longer than anticipated!"
Fight against terrorismIn the wake of the targeting of airports by terrorists, enthusiasts' organizations and the police in the UK have co-operated in drawing up a code of conduct. This attempts to allow enthusiasts to continue their hobby and to increase security around airports, by asking enthusiasts to contact police if they believe something they see or hear is suspicious."Plane-spotters join terror fight." bbc.co.uk, 4 May 2004 Retrieved: 16 September 2007. Quote: "Police and BAA are recruiting aviation enthusiasts to help fight terrorism at London's Heathrow Airport."The organization of such groups has now reached over to North America. For example, the Bensenville Illinois Police Department have sponsored an Airport Watch group at the Chicago O'Hare Airport. Members are issued id cards and are given training to record and report unusual activities around the airport perimeter (members are not permitted airside). Meetings are attended and supported by the F.B.I., Chicago Department of Aviation and the T.S.A who also provide regular training to group members. The Bensenville program was modeled after similar programs in Toronto, Ottawa and Minneapolis.
Extraordinary renditionFollowing the events of 9/11 information collected by planespotters helped uncover what is known as extraordinary rendition by the CIA.  Information on unusual movements of rendition aircraft provided data which led first to news reports and then to a number of governmental and inter-governmental investigations.Torture Taxi, Trevor Paglen and A.C.Thompson, Icon Books, UK 2007
See also

Bus spotting
Train spotting
Satellite watching


References{{reflist}}
Further reading

Eden, Paul and Dave Windle. Civil Aircraft Recognition. Ramsbury, Marlborough, Wiltshire, UK: The Crowood Press Ltd., 1992. ISBN 1-84037-253-2.


External links{{commons category}}

{{dmoz}}
A Wiki for Spotters

{{DEFAULTSORT:Aircraft Spotting}}

cs:Letecký spotter
es:Spotting
fr:Spotter
hr:Promatranje zrakoplova
nl:Vliegtuigspotten
ja:?????
pl:Planespotting
ru:????????
fi:Lentokonespottaus
uk:???????
zh:????