title{{Wiktionary}}
Ajax may refer to:
{{TOC right}}
Mythology

Ajax (mythology), son of Telamon, ruler of Salamis and a hero in the Trojan War, also known as &#34;Ajax the Great&#34;
Ajax the Lesser, son of Oileus, ruler of Locris and the leader of the Locrian contingent during the Trojan War.


Events

Operation Ajax, the 1953 Iranian coup d'état


People

Ajax (missionary), Arian missionary who converted the Suevi to Christianity (c. 466)
Ajax, pen name of Australian nature writer Sidney William Jackson


Information technology

Ajax (programming) (Asynchronous JavaScript and XML), a technique used in web application development
Ajax framework, a framework for the Ajax technique
Ajax (floppy disk controller), a floppy disk controller fitted to the Atari STE


Sports
Football

AFC Ajax, a football club from Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Aias Salamina F.C., a football club based in Salamina, Greece birthplace of Ajax the Telamonian
Ajax Cape Town FC, a South African football club
Ajax de Ouenzé, a Congolese football club
Ajax Futebol Clube, a Brazilian football club
Ajax Kenitra, a Moroccan futsal (indoor football) club
Ajax Orlando Prospects, also known as Ajax America, an American soccer team from Orlando, Florida
Ajax Sportman Combinatie (ASC), a cricket and football club in Leiden, The Netherlands
FC Ajax Lasnamäe, an Estonian football club
Rabat Ajax F.C., a Maltese football club
Unión Ájax, a football club in Trujillo, Honduras
FC Ajax Sofia, a football club in Sofia, Bulgaria


Handball

Ajax Heroes, a Danish handball team


Racing

Ajax (horse) (b. 1901), a French Champion racehorse
Ajax II (b. 1934), a Champion Australian racehorse


Vehicles

Ajax (1906 automobile), Aigner, Switzerland
Ajax (1913 automobile), Briscoe, France
Ajax (1914 automobile), Seattle, Washington, U.S.
Ajax (1921 automobile), prototype, U.S.
Ajax (American automobile), Nash Motors, 1925–1926, U.S.
HMS Ajax, several ships of the Royal Navy
USS Ajax, several ships of the United States Navy
Ajax, one of the eight South Devon Railway Dido class steam locomotives, in service 1860-1884
Ajax, a LMS Royal Scot Class express locomotive, in service 1927-1962
Ayaks, a Soviet top secret aerospacecraft project
Nike Ajax, an American anti-aircraft missile


Literature and Fiction

Ajax (Sophocles), a play by the ancient Greek tragedian Sophocles
Ajax (Disney), a fictional company (the Disney equivalent of Looney Tunes&#39; Acme Corporation)
Ajax Duckman, a character in the animated television series Duckman
Martian Manhunter, a comic superhero, called Ajax in Brazil and Portugal
Ajax (comics), the name of two fictional characters from the Marvel Universe
Ajak, a Marvel Comics character, a member of the Eternals, sometimes known as &#34;Ajax the Greater&#34;
Ajax, a character in the 1979 film The Warriors


Music

Ajax (band), an electronic band from New York City
Ajax (DJ), an Australian electro mashup DJ
Ajax Records (Quebec) (1921–1926), a North American record company
AjaX, keyboardist for The Pop Culture Suicides


Videogames

Ajax (video game), an arcade game


Places

Ajax, Louisiana, United States, an unincorporated community in Natchitoches Parish
Ajax, Ontario, a town in Canada
Ajax GO Station, a station in the GO Transit network located in the town
Ajax High School, a public high school located in the town
Ajax, Utah, a ghost town
Aspen Mountain (Colorado), United States, also known as Ajax Mountain
Kanichee Mine, Temagami, Ontario, Canada, also known as Ajax Mine


Business

Ajax (cleanser), a brand of cleaning products.

{{disambig}}af:Ajax
br:Aias
bg:????
ca:Ajax
cs:Ajax
cy:Ajax
da:Ajax (flertydig)
de:Ajax
el:????
es:Ajax
eo:Ajakso
eu:Ajax (argipena)
fa:?????
fr:Ajax
fy:Ajax
gl:Áiax
ko:????
id:Ajax
is:Ajax
it:Ajax
he:Ajax
la:Aiax
lt:Ajax (reikšm?s)
hu:Ajax (egyértelm?sít? lap)
ml:??????? (????????)
ms:Ajax (nyahkekaburan)
nl:Ajax
nds-nl:Ajax
ja:?????
no:Ajax
nn:Ajax
pl:Ajax
pt:Ajax
ro:Ajax
ru:????
sq:Ajax
simple:Ajax
sk:Ajax
sl:Ajax
sr:?????
sh:Ajax
fi:Ajax
sv:Ajax
th:Ajax
tr:Ajax
uk:???? (????????)
vi:Ajax
zh:Ajax (???)