titleAlain de Lille (or Alanus ab Insulis) (c. 1128–1202), French theologian and poet, was born, probably in Lille, some years before 1128. 
Life
Little is known of his life.  He seems to have taught in the schools of Paris, and he attended the Lateran Council in 1179.  He afterwards inhabited Montpellier (he is sometimes called Alanus de Montepessulano), lived for a time outside the walls of any cloister, and finally retired to Cîteaux, where he died in 1202.  He had a very widespread reputation during his lifetime and his knowledge, more varied than profound, caused him to be called Doctor universalis. Among his very numerous works two poems entitle him to a distinguished place in the Latin literature of the Middle Ages; one of these, the De planctu naturae, is an ingenious satire on the vices of humanity.  He created the allegory of grammatical "conjugation" which was to have its successors throughout the Middle Ages.  The Anticlaudianus, a treatise on morals as allegory, the form of which recalls the pamphlet of Claudian against Rufinus, is agreeably versified and relatively pure in its latinity.
Theologian
As a theologian Alain de Lille shared in the mystic reaction of the second half of the 12th century against the scholastic philosophy.  His mysticism, however, is far from being as absolute as that of the Victorines.  In the Anticlaudianus he sums up as follows: Reason, guided by prudence, can unaided discover most of the truths of the physical order; for the apprehension of religious truths it must trust to faith.  This rule is completed in his treatise, Ars catholicae fidei, as follows: Theology itself may be demonstrated by reason.  Alain even ventures an immediate application of this principle, and tries to prove geometrically the dogmas defined in the Creed.  This bold attempt is entirely factitious and verbal, and it is only his employment of various terms not generally used in such a connection (axiom, theorem, corollary, etc.) that gives his treatise its apparent originality.
Works and attributions
Alain de Lille has often been confounded with other persons named Alain, in particular with another Alanus (Alain, bishop of Auxerre), Alan, abbot of Tewkesbury, Alain de Podio, etc.  Certain facts of their lives have been attributed to him, as well as some of their works: thus the Life of St Bernard should be ascribed to Alain of Auxerre and the Commentary upon Merlin to Alan of Tewkesbury.  Alan of Lille was not the author of a Memoriale rerum difficilium, published under his name, nor of Moralium dogma philosophorum, nor of the satirical Apocalypse of Golias once attributed to him; and it is exceedingly doubtful whether the Dicta Alani de lapide philosophico really issued from his pen.  On the other hand, it now seems practically demonstrated that Alain de Lille was the author of the Ars catholicae fidei and the treatise Contra haereticos.In his sermons on capital sins, Alain argued that sodomy and homicide are the most serious sins, since they call forth the wrath of God, which led to the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah. His chief work on penance, the Liber poenitenitalis dedicated to Henry de Sully, exercised great influence on the many manuals of penance produced as a result of the Fourth Lateran Council. Alain's identification of the sins against nature included bestiality, masturbation, oral and anal intercourse, incest, adultery and rape. In addition to his battle against moral decay, Alan wrote a work against Islam, Judaism and Christian heretics dedicated to William VIII of Montpellier.
Quotes


God is an intelligible sphere whose centre is everywhere and whose circumference is nowhere.
Do not hold as gold all that shines as gold.


References{{DNB Poster}}

{{1911}}


External links

Alanus ab Insulis, Anticlaudianus sive De officiis viri boni et perfecti
Alanus ab Insulis, Liber de planctu naturae
Alanus ab Insulis, Omnis mundi creatura
Alain de Lille, The Complaint of Nature


Further reading

Dynes, Wayne R. &#39;Alan of Lille.&#39; in Encyclopedia of Homosexuality, Garland Publishing, 1990. p. 32.
Alanus de insulis, Anticlaudianus, a c. di . M. Sannelli, La Finestra editrice, Lavis, 2004.
{{cite encyclopedia}}
{{Medieval Philosophy}}{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Lille, Alain De}}







ca:Alain de Lille
de:Alanus ab Insulis
es:Alain de Lille
eo:Alano el Lille
fr:Alain de Lille
ga:Alain de Lille
gl:Alain de Lille
it:Alano di Lilla
la:Alanus ab Insulis
nl:Alanus van Rijsel
pl:Alan z Lille
pt:Alain de Lille
ru:???? ?????????
sk:Alanus ab Insulis
sv:Alain de Lille
uk:???? ?????????