title{{Infobox artist}}
Alberto Giacometti (10 October 1901 Borgonovo, Stampa – 11 January 1966) was a Swiss  sculptor, painter,  draughtsman, and printmaker.Alberto Giacometti was born in the canton Graubünden's southerly alpine valley Val Bregaglia and came from an artistic background; his father, Giovanni, was a well-known post-Impressionist painter. Alberto was the eldest of four children and was interested in art from the beginning of his life.
Early lifeGiacometti was born in Borgonovo, now part of the Swiss municipality of Stampa, near the Italian border.  His family was descended from Protestant refugees escaping the Italian Inquisition.  His father, Giovanni Giacometti, was a painter. Alberto attended the School of Fine Arts in Geneva.In 1922 he moved to Paris to study under the sculptor Antoine Bourdelle, an associate of Auguste Rodin. It was there that Giacometti experimented with cubism and surrealism and came to be regarded as one of the leading surrealist sculptors. Among his associates were Joan Miró, Max Ernst, Pablo Picasso, Bror Hjorth and Balthus.Between 1936 and 1940, Giacometti concentrated his sculpting on the human head, focusing on the sitter's gaze. He preferred models he was close to, his brother and the artist Isabel Rawsthorne (then known as Isabel Delmer). This was followed by a unique artistic phase in which his statues of Isabel became stretched out; her limbs elongated.New York Times article on The Women of Giacometti exhibition, Pace Wildenstein Gallery 2005 http://www.nytimes.com/2005/11/20/arts/design/20kino.html?pagewanted=all Obsessed with creating his sculptures exactly as he envisaged through his unique view of reality, he often carved until they were as thin as nails and reduced to the size of a pack of cigarettes, much to his consternation. A friend of his once said that if Giacometti decided to sculpt you, "he would make your head look like the blade of a knife." After his marriage to Annette Arm his tiny sculptures became larger, but the larger they grew, the thinner they became. Giacometti said that the final result represented the sensation he felt when he looked at a woman.His paintings underwent a parallel procedure. The figures appear isolated, are severely attenuated, and are the result of continuous reworking. Subjects were frequently revisited: one of his favorite models was his younger brother Diego Giacometti.Tate Collection: Seated Man by Alberto Giacometti Retrieved July 13, 2007. A third brother Bruno Giacometti is a Swiss architect.
Later years



In 1958 Giacometti was asked to create a monumental sculpture for the Chase Manhattan Bank building in New York, which was beginning construction. Although he had for many years "harbored an ambition to create work for a public square",http://www.christies.com/LotFinder/LotDetailsPrintable.aspx?intObjectID=5075599 he "had never set foot in New York, and knew nothing about life in a rapidly evolving metropolis. Nor had he ever laid eyes on an actual skyscraper", according to  his biographer, James Lord.James Lord, Giacometti: A Biography, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York, 1986, pp. 331-332 ISBN ISBN 978-0374525255 ISBN 0374525250 Giacometti's work on the project resulted in the four figures of standing women—his largest sculptures—entitled Grande femme debout I through IV (1960). The commission was never completed, however, because Giacometti was unsatisfied by the relationship between the sculpture and the site, and abandoned the project.In 1959 he contributed to the British arts review X magazine (other contributors included Bacon, Freud, Auerbach and Kokoschka) with an article, The Dream, the Sphinx, and the Death of T, and drawings. In 1962, Giacometti was awarded the grand prize for sculpture at the Venice Biennale, and the award brought with it worldwide fame. Even when he had achieved popularity and his work was in demand, he still reworked models, often destroying them or setting them aside to be returned to years later. The prints produced by Giacometti are often overlooked but the catalogue raisonné, Giacometti - The Complete Graphics and 15 Drawings by Herbert Lust (Tudor 1970), comments on their impact and gives details of the number of copies of each print. Some of his most important images were in editions of only 30 and many were described as rare in 1970.In his later years Giacometti's works were shown in a number of large exhibitions throughout Europe. Riding a wave of international popularity, and despite his declining health, he travelled to the United States in 1965 for an exhibition of his works at the Museum of Modern Art in New York. As his last work he prepared the text for the book Paris sans fin, a sequence of 150 lithographs containing memories of all the places where he had lived.Giacometti died in 1966 of heart disease (pericarditis) and chronic bronchitis at the Kantonsspital in Chur, Switzerland. His body was returned to his birthplace in Borgonovo, where he was interred close to his parents. In May 2007 the executor of his widow's estate, French foreign minister Roland Dumas, was convicted of illegally selling Giacometti's works to a top auctioneer. The auctioneer, Jacques Tajan, was also convicted. Both were ordered to pay €850,000 to the Alberto and Annette Giacometti Foundation.{{Cite web}}
Artistic analysis
Giacometti was a key player in the Surrealist art movement, but his work resists easy categorization. Some describe it as formalist, others argue it is expressionist or otherwise having to do with what Deleuze calls 'blocs of sensation' (as in Deleuze's analysis of Francis Bacon). Even after his excommunication from the Surrealist group, while the intention of his sculpting was usually imitation, the end products were an expression of his emotional response to the subject. He attempted to create renditions of his models the way he saw them, and the way he thought they ought to be seen. He once said that he was sculpting not the human figure but "the shadow that is cast."Scholar William Barrett in Irrational Man: A Study in Existential Philosophy (1962), argues that the attenuated forms of Giacometti's figures reflect the view of 20th century modernism and existentialism that modern life is increasingly empty and devoid of meaning.
"All the sculptures of today, like those of the past, will end one day in pieces... So it is important to fashion ones work carefully in its smallest recess and charge every particle of matter with life."A new exhibition in Paris, since September 2011, shows how Giacometti strongly drew his inspiration for his work from Etruscan art. Giacometti and The Etruscans, La Pinacothèque de Paris
Legacy
Public collectionsGiacometti's work is displayed in numerous public collections, including the:

Tate in London
Kunsthaus Zürich
Detroit Institute of Arts
Museum of Modern Art in New York
Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum
National Gallery of Art in Washington D.C.
Art Institute of Chicago
Baltimore Museum of Art, in Baltimore, Maryland
Los Angeles County Museum of Art
University of Michigan Museum of Art
Carnegie Museum of Art, in Pittsburgh
Albright-Knox Art Gallery in Buffalo
Louisiana Museum of Modern Art, in Denmark
Bechtler Museum of Modern Art, in Charlotte, North Carolina
J. Paul Getty Museum, in Los Angeles, California
Tehran Museum of Contemporary Art, in Iran
Bündner Kunstmuseum, in Chur, Switzerland
Museo Botero, in Bogotá, Colombia
Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Washington D.C.
Johnson Museum of Art at Cornell University
Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts at University of East Anglia


Art FoundationsThe Fondation Alberto et Annette Giacometti, having received a bequest from Alberto Giacometti's widow Annette, holds a collection of circa 5,000 works, frequently displayed around the world through exhibitions and long-term loans. A public interest institution, the Foundation was created in 2003 and aims at promoting, disseminating, preserving and protecting Alberto Giacometti's work.The Alberto Giacometti-Stiftung established in Zürich in 1965, holds a smaller collection of works acquired from the collections of Pittsburgh industrialist G. David Thompson.
Notable salesIn November 2000 a Giacometti bronze, Grande Femme Debout I, sold for $14.3 million.{{cite news}}  Grande Femme Debout II was bought by the Gagosian Gallery for $27.4 million at Christie's auction in New York City on May 6, 2008.Afp.google.com,   Monet fetches record price at New York auctionL'Homme qui marche I, a life-sized bronze sculpture of a man, became one of the most expensive works of art and the most expensive sculpture ever sold at auction on February 2, 2010 when it sold for £65 million (US$104.3 million) at Sotheby's, London.http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/8497287.stm Giacometti sculpture fetches £65m at Sotheby's auctionAlberto Giacometti's Walking Man I Sells for a Record-Breaking $104,327,006 at Sotheby's  Grande tête mince, a large bronze bust, sold for $53.3 million just three months later.
Other legacyGiacometti created the monument on the grave of Gerda Taro at Père Lachaise Cemetery.Robert Whelan, "Robert Capa, the definitive collection", p8, Phaidon press 2001 ISBN 978-0-7148-4449-7In 2001 he was included in the Painting the Century 101 Portrait Masterpieces 1900-2000 exhibition held at the National Portrait Gallery, London.Giacometti and his sculpture L'Homme qui marche I appear on the current 100 Swiss Franc banknote.Schweizer NationalbankAccording to Dr. Michael Peppiatt in a lecture at Cambridge University on July 8, 2010, Giacometti, who had a friendship with author/playwright Samuel Beckett, created a tree for the set of a 1961 Paris production of "Waiting For Godot".
Notes
{{Reflist}}
References


Jacques Dupin (1962) &#34;Alberto Giacometti&#34;, Paris, Maeght
Reinhold Hohl (1971) &#34;Alberto Giacometti&#34;, Stuttgart: Gerd Hatje
Die Sammlung der Alberto Giacometti-Stiftung (1990), Zürich, Zürcher Kunstgesellschaft
Alberto Giacometti. Sculptures - peintures - dessins. Paris, Musée d&#39;art moderne de la Ville de Paris, 1991-92.
Jean Soldini (1993) &#34;Alberto Giacometti. Le colossal, la mère, le sacré&#34;, Lausanne, L&#39;Age d&#39;Homme
David Sylvester (1996) Looking at Giacometti, Henry Holt &#38; Co.
Alberto Giacometti 1901-1966. Kunsthalle Wien, 1996
James Lord (1997) Giacometti: A Biography, Farrar, Straus and Giroux
Alberto Giacometti. Kunsthaus Zürich, 2001; New York, The Museum of Modern Art, 2001-2002.
Yves Bonnefoy (2006) Alberto Giacometti: A Biography of His Work, New edition, Flammarion
An Anthology from X (Oxford University Press 1988). X (magazine) ran from 1959-62. Edited by the poet David Wright &#38; the painter Patrick Swift. Apart from contributions from Giacometti X also included painters such as Bacon, Freud, Auerbach, Bomberg, Kokoschka, et al., and writers such as W.H. Auden, Samuel Beckett, et al.
Andreas Weiland, &#34;The Sculptures of Alberto Giacometti / Seen in the Kunsthal Rotterdam (Giacometti Exhibition, October 18, 2008 – February 8, 2009)&#34;, in: Art in Society, issue # 10
http://www.art-in-society.de/AS10/Giacometti-3/Giacometti.html
External links{{commonscat}}

The Alberto et Annette Giacometti Foundation website:  http://www.fondation-giacometti.fr
{{SIKART}}
Works of Alberto Giacometti:
The UNESCO Works of Art Collection
{{MoMA artist}}
smARThistory: Giacometti's City Square
Life of Alberto Giacometti:
Chronology of his life with illustrations from the Museum of Modern Art
Exhibition at Kunsthaus Zürich from 27 February until 24 May 2009

{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Giacometti, Alberto}}











{{Link FA}}zh-min-nan:Alberto Giacometti
ca:Alberto Giacometti
cs:Alberto Giacometti
da:Alberto Giacometti
de:Alberto Giacometti
el:???????? ??????????
es:Alberto Giacometti
eo:Alberto Giacometti
eu:Alberto Giacometti
fa:?????? ???????
fr:Alberto Giacometti
ko:???? ????
hr:Alberto Giacometti
it:Alberto Giacometti
he:?????? ?'?????
la:Albertus Giacometti
hu:Alberto Giacometti
nl:Alberto Giacometti
ja:?????????????
no:Alberto Giacometti
pl:Alberto Giacometti
pt:Alberto Giacometti
ro:Alberto Giacometti
ru:??????????, ????????
scn:Albertu Giacumetti
sr:??????? ????????
fi:Alberto Giacometti
sv:Alberto Giacometti
tl:Alberto Giacometti
tr:Alberto Giacometti
uk:???????? ??????????
vi:Alberto Giacometti
zh:????