title{{About}}
{{Infobox Officeholder}}
Alexander Fyodorovich Kerensky ({{lang-ru}}, {{IPA-ru}}; {{OldStyleDate}}&nbsp;– 11 June 1970) was a major political leader before and during the Russian Revolutions of 1917.Kerensky served as the second Prime Minister of the Russian Provisional Government until Vladimir Lenin was elected by the All-Russian Congress of Soviets following the October Revolution. He died in exile.
Biography
Early life and activismAlexander Kerensky was born in Simbirsk (now Ulyanovsk) on the Volga River into the family of a secondary school principal. His father, Fyodor Kerensky, was a teacher. His mother, Nadezhda Adler, was the daughter of a nobleman, Alexander Adler, head of the Topographical Bureau of the Kazan Military District. Her mother, Nadezhda Kalmykova, was the daughter of a former serf who had bought his freedom before serfdom was abolished in 1861, allowing him to become a wealthy Moscow merchant.Encyclopedia of Cyril and Method (In Russian only){{Verify credibility}}Kerensky's father was the headmaster of Vladimir Ulyanov (Lenin) at a secondary school for boys in Simbirsk, and members of the Kerensky and Ulyanov families were friends. In 1889, when Kerensky was eight, his family moved to Tashkent, where his father had been appointed the main inspector of public schools (superintendent). Kerensky graduated with honors from a Tashkent secondary school in 1899. The same year he entered St. Petersburg University, where he studied history and philology in his first year. The next year he switched to the Law Department and received a law degree in 1904, getting married in the same year to the daughter of a Russian general.A Doomed Democracy Bernard Butcher, Stanford Magazine, January/February 2001 He worked as a legal counsel to victims of government violence in early December 1905. At the end of the month he was jailed on suspicion of belonging to a militant group. Afterwards he gained a reputation for his work as a defence lawyer in a number of political trials of revolutionaries.Political Figures of Russia, 1917, Biographical Dictionary, Large Russian Encyclopedia, 1993, p. 143.He was elected to the Fourth Duma in 1912 as a member of the Trudoviks, a moderate labour party who were associated with the Socialist-Revolutionary Party. He was a brilliant orator and skilled parliamentary leader of the socialist opposition to the regime of the ruling Tsar, Nicholas II.
February Revolution of 1917When the February Revolution broke out in spring of 1917, Kerensky was one of its most prominent leaders: he was member of the Provisional Committee of the State Duma and was elected vice-chairman of the Petrograd Soviet. He simultaneously became the first Minister of Justice in the newly formed Provisional Government. When the Soviet passed a resolution prohibiting its leaders from joining the government, Kerensky delivered a stirring speech at a Soviet meeting. Although the decision was never formalized, he was granted a de facto exemption and continued acting in both capacities.After the first government crisis over Pavel Milyukov's secret note re-committing Russia to its original war aims on May 2–4, Kerensky became the Minister of War and the dominant figure in the newly formed socialist-liberal coalition government. On 10 May (Julian calendar), Kerensky started for the front, and visited one division after another, urging the men to do their duty. His speeches were impressive and convincing for the moment, but had little lasting effect. Under Allied pressure to continue the war, he launched what became known as the Kerensky Offensive against the Austro-Hungarian/German South Army on 17 June (Julian calendar). At first successful, the offensive was soon stopped and then thrown back by a strong counter-attack. The Russian Army suffered heavy losses and it was clear from the many incidents of desertion, sabotage, and mutiny that the Russian Army was no longer willing to attack.Kerensky was heavily criticised by the military for his liberal policies, which included stripping officers of their mandate (handing overriding control to revolutionary inclined "soldier committees" instead), the abolition of the death penalty, and the presence of various revolutionary agitators at the front. Many officers jokingly referred to commander in chief Kerensky as "persuader in chief".On 2 July 1917, the first coalition collapsed over the question of Ukraine's autonomy. Following July Days unrest in Petrograd and suppression of the Bolsheviks, Kerensky succeeded Prince Lvov as Russia's Prime Minister. Following the Kornilov Affair at the end of August and the resignation of the other ministers, he appointed himself Supreme Commander-in-Chief as well.Kerensky's next move, on 15 September, was to proclaim Russia a republic, which was quite contrary to the understanding that the Provisional Government should only hold power until the Constituent Assembly should meet to decide Russia's form of rule. He formed a five-member Directory, which consisted of Kerensky himself, minister of foreign affairs Mikhail Tereshchenko, minister of war General Verkhovsky, minister of navy Admiral Dmitry Verderevsky and minister of post and telegraph Nikitin. He retained his post in the final coalition government in October 1917 until it was overthrown by the Bolsheviks.Kerensky's major challenge was that Russia was exhausted after three years of war, while the provisional government did not offer much motivation for a victory outside of continuing Russia's obligations towards its allies. Russia's continued involvement in World War I was not popular among the lower and middle classes and especially the soldiers. They had all believed that Russia would stop fighting when the Provisional Government took power, now they all felt deceived. Furthermore, Lenin and his Bolshevik party were promising "peace, land, and bread" under a communist system. The army was disintegrating due to a lack of discipline, which fostered desertion in large numbers. By autumn 1917, an estimated two million men had unofficially left the army.Kerensky and the other political leaders continued their obligation to Russia's allies by continuing involvement in World War I – fearing that the economy, already under huge stress from the war effort, might become increasingly unstable if vital supplies from France and the United Kingdom were to be cut off. Some also feared that Germany would demand enormous territorial concessions as the price for peace (which indeed happened in the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk). The dilemma of whether to withdraw was a great one, and Kerensky's inconsistent and impractical policies further destabilized the army and the country at large.Furthermore, Kerensky adopted a policy that isolated the right-wing conservatives, both democratic and monarchist-oriented. His philosophy of "no enemies to the left" greatly empowered the Bolsheviks and gave them a free hand, allowing them to take over the military arm or "voyenka" of the Petrograd and Moscow Soviets. His arrest of Kornilov and other officers left him without strong allies against the Bolsheviks, who ended up being Kerensky's strongest and most determined adversaries, as opposed to the right wing, which evolved into the White movement.
October Revolution of 1917During the Kornilov Affair, Kerensky had distributed arms to the Petrograd workers, and by November most of these armed workers had gone over to the Bolsheviks. On {{OldStyleDateNY}} 1917 the Bolsheviks launched the second Russian revolution of the year. Kerensky's government in Petrograd had almost no support in the city. Only one small force, the First Petrograd Women's Battalion, also known as The Women's Death Battalion, was willing to fight for the government against the Bolsheviks, but this force too crossed over to the revolution without firing a single shot. It took less than 20 hours before the Bolsheviks had taken over the government.Kerensky escaped the Bolsheviks and went to Pskov, where he rallied some loyal troops for an attempt to retake the city. His troops managed to capture Tsarskoe Selo, but were beaten the next day at Pulkovo. Kerensky narrowly escaped, and spent the next few weeks in hiding before fleeing the country, eventually arriving in France. During the Russian Civil War he supported neither side, as he opposed both the Bolshevik regime and the White Movement.
Life in exile

Kerensky lived in Paris until 1940, engaged in the endless splits and quarrels of the exiled Russian politicians. In 1939, Kerensky married the former Australian journalist Lydia ‘Nell' Tritton.Tritton, Lydia Ellen (1899 - 1946) Biographical Entry - Australian Dictionary of Biography Online When Germany occupied France in 1940, they emigrated to the United States.
Tritton and Kerensky married at Martins Creek, Pennsylvania.When his wife became terminally ill in 1945, he travelled with her to Brisbane, Australia, and lived there with her family. She suffered a stroke in February, and he remained there until her death on 10 April 1946. Kerensky returned to the United States, where he spent the rest of his life.After the German-led invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, Kerensky offered his support to Joseph Stalin, but received no reply. Instead, he made broadcasts in Russian in support of the war effort.{{Citation needed}}Kerensky eventually settled in New York City, but spent much of his time at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University in California, where he both used and contributed to the Institution's huge archive on Russian history, and where he taught graduate courses. He wrote and broadcast extensively on Russian politics and history. His last public speech was delivered at Kalamazoo College, in Kalamazoo, Michigan.Kerensky died at his home in New York City in 1970, one of the last surviving major participants in the turbulent events of 1917. The local Russian Orthodox Churches in New York refused to grant Kerensky burial, seeing him as being a freemason and being largely responsible for Russia falling to the Bolsheviks. A Serbian Orthodox Church also refused so Kerensky's body was flown to London where he was buried at Putney Vale's non-denominational cemetery.One of Kerensky's sons was the engineer Oleg Kerensky.
Footnotes{{reflist}}
Kerensky died at St Luke's Hospital in NYC, rather than at home.
Additional reading
Kerensky's works

The Prelude to Bolshevism (1919) ISBN 0-8383-1422-8,
The Catastrophe (1927),
The Crucifixion of Liberty (1934),
Russia and History's Turning Point (1965).


Books

R. Abraham, Kerensky: First Love of the Revolution, Columbia University Press, 1987. ISBN 0-231-06108-0


External links{{Commons category}}

An account of Kerensky at Stanford in the 1950s
{{IMDb name}}
Alexander Kerensky Museum in London
The Prelude To Bolshevism: The Kornilov Rising (1919)
The Catastrophe (1927)

{{s-start}}
{{s-off}}
{{succession box}}
{{s-end}}
{{Prime Ministers of Russia}}
{{Russian Revolution 1917}}{{Use dmy dates}}{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Kerensky, Alexander}}

















ar:??????? ????????
az:Aleksandr Kerenski
be:????????? ????????? ????????
bg:?????????? ????????
ca:Aleksandr Kèrenski
cs:Alexandr Fjodorovi? Kerenskij
da:Aleksandr Kerenskij
de:Alexander Fjodorowitsch Kerenski
et:Aleksandr Kerenski
el:?????????? ????????
es:Aleksandr Kérenski
eo:Aleksandr Kerenskij
eu:Aleksandr Kerenski
fa:???????? ????????? ??????
fr:Alexandre Kerensky
ga:Alexander Kerensky
gl:Aleksandr Kérenski
ko:????? ????
hy:????????? ????????
hr:Aleksandar Kerenski
id:Alexander Kerensky
it:Aleksandr Fëdorovi? Kerenskij
he:??????? ??????
kk:????????? ????????? ?????????
la:Alexander Kerenskij
lv:Aleksandrs Kerenskis
hu:Alekszandr Fjodorovics Kerenszkij
mk:?????????? ????????
nl:Aleksandr Kerenski
ne:???????????? ??????????
ja:??????????????
no:Aleksandr Kerenskij
nn:Aleksandr Kerenskij
pl:Aleksander Kiere?ski
pt:Alexander Kerensky
ro:Alexandr Kerenski
ru:?????????, ????????? ?????????
sk:Alexandr Fiodorovi? Kerenskij
sl:Aleksander Fjodorovi? Kerenski
sr:?????????? ????????
sh:Aleksandar Kerenski
fi:Aleksandr Kerenski
sv:Aleksandr Kerenskij
tr:Aleksandr Kerenski
uk:?????????? ????????? ?????????
vi:Aleksandr Fyodorovich Kerenskii
zh:????·????