title{{redirect}}
{{Infobox Monarch}}Alexios&nbsp;I Komnenos, Latinized as Alexius&nbsp;I Comnenus ({{lang-el}}, 1056 – 15 August 1118—note that some sources list his date of birth as 1048),Norwich, pg. 4 was Byzantine emperor from 1081 to 1118, and although he was not the founder of the Komnenian dynasty, it was during his reign that the Komnenos family came to full power. The title 'Nobilissimus' was given to senior army commanders, the future emperor Alexios I Komnenos being the first to be thus honoured.Kazhdan, pg. 1489–1490 Inheriting a collapsing empire and faced with constant warfare during his reign against both the Seljuq Turks in Asia Minor and the Normans in the western Balkans, Alexios was able to halt the Byzantine decline and begin the military, financial, and territorial recovery known as the Komnenian restoration. His appeals to Western Europe for help against the Turks were also the catalyst that triggered the Crusades.
LifeAlexios was the son of Ioannis Komnenos and Anna Dalassena,Kazhdan, pg. 63 and the nephew of Isaac&nbsp;I Komnenos (emperor 1057–1059). Alexios' father declined the throne on the abdication of Isaac, who was accordingly succeeded by four emperors of other families between 1059 and 1081. Under one of these emperors, Romanos&nbsp;IV Diogenes (1067–1071), Alexios served with distinction against the Seljuq Turks. Under Michael&nbsp;VII Doukas Parapinakes (1071–1078) and Nikephoros&nbsp;III Botaneiates (1078–1081), he was also employed, along with his elder brother Isaac, against rebels in Asia Minor, Thrace, and in Epirus.In 1074, the western mercenaries led by Roussel de Bailleul rebelled in Asia Minor,Norwich, pg. 2 but Alexios successfully subdued them by 1076."Alexiad", 1.1 In 1078, he was appointed commander of the field army in the West by Nikephoros&nbsp;III.Norwich, pg. 3 In this capacity, Alexios defeated the rebellions of Nikephoros Bryennios the Elder (whose son or grandson later married Alexios' daughter Anna) and Nikephoros Basilakes, the first at the Battle of Kalavrye and the latter in a surprise night attack on his camp.Canduci, pg. 277 Alexios was ordered to march against his brother-in-law Nikephoros Melissenos in Asia Minor but refused to fight his kinsman. This did not, however, lead to a demotion, as Alexios was needed to counter the expected invasion of the Normans of Southern Italy, led by Robert Guiscard.
Conspiracy and revolt of the Komnenoi against Botaneites
While the Byzantine troops were assembling for the expedition, Alexios was approached by the Doukas faction at court, who convinced him to join a conspiracy against Nikephoros&nbsp;III. The mother of Alexios, Anna Dalassena, was to play a prominent role in this coup d'état of 1081, along with the current empress, Maria of Alania.Garland, "Anna Dalassena" First married to Michael&nbsp;VII Doukas and secondly to Nikephoros&nbsp;III Botaneiates, she was preoccupied with the future of her son by Michael&nbsp;VII, Constantine Doukas. Nikephoros&nbsp;III intended to leave the throne to one of his close relatives,Finlay, pg. 59 and this resulted in Maria's ambivalence and alliance with the Komnenoi. The real driving force behind this political alliance was Anna Dalassene."Alexiad", 2.2.1–2Already closely connected to the Komnenoi through Maria's cousin Irene to Isaac Komnenos, the Komnenoi brothers were able to see the empress under the pretense of a friendly family visit. Furthermore, to aid the conspiracy Maria had adopted Alexios as her son, though she was only five years older than heNorwich, pg. 5 Maria was persuaded to do so on the advice of her own "Alans" and her eunuchs, who had been instigated to do his by Isaac Komnenos. Knowing Anna's tight hold on her family, it must have been with her implicit approval that he be adopted. As a result, Alexios and Constantine, Maria's son, were now adoptive brothers and both Isaac and Alexios took an oath that they would safeguard his rights as emperor."Alexiad" 2,1,4–6, 2.3.2–3,2.3.4; cf, Bryennius 4.2, who dates the adoption to early in the reign of Botaneiates By secretly giving inside information to the Komnenoi, Maria was an invaluable ally."Alexiad", 2.3.4,2.4.5As stated in the Alexiad, Isaac and Alexios left Constantinople in mid-February 1081 to raise an army against Botaneiates.Norwich, pg. 6 However, when the time came, Anna quickly and surreptitiously mobilized the remainder of the family and took refuge in the Hagia Sophia. From there she negotiated with the emperor for the safety of family members left in the capital, while protesting her sons' innocence of hostile actions; under the falsehood of making a vesperal visit to worship at the church, she deliberately excluded the grandson of Botaneiates and his loyal tutor, met with Alexios and Isaac and fled for the forum of Constantine. The tutor found them missing and eventually found them on the palace grounds but she was able to convince him that they would return to the palace shortly. Then to gain entrance to both the outer and inner sanctuary of the church the women pretended to the gatekeepers that they were pilgrims from Cappadocia who had spent all their funds and wanted to worship before starting their return trip. However, before they were to gain entry into the sanctuary, Straboromanos and royal guards caught up with them to summon them back to the palace. Anna then protested that the family was in fear for their lives, her sons were loyal subjects (Alexios and Isaac were discovered absent without leave), and had learned of a plot by enemies of the Komnenoi to have them both blinded and had, therefore, fled the capital so they may continue to be of loyal service to the emperor."Alexiad",2.5.5 She refused to go with them and demanded that they allow her to pray to the Mother of God for protection. This request was granted and Anna then manifested her true theatrical and manipulative capabilities:
"She was allowed to enter. As if she were weighed down with old age and worn out by grief, she walked slowly and when she approached the actual entrance to the sanctuary made two genuflections; on the third she sank to the floor and taking firm hold of the sacred doors, cried in a loud voice: "Unless my hands are cuff off, I will not leave this holy place except on one condition: that I receive the emperor's cross as guarantee of safety"."Alexiad", 2.5.6Nikephoros&nbsp;III Botaneiates was forced into a public vow that he would grant protection to the family. Straboromanos tried to give her his cross, but for Anna this was not sufficiently large enough so that all bystanders could witness the oath. She also demanded that the cross be personally sent by Botaneiates as a vow of his good faith. He obliged, sending a complete assurance for the family with his own cross. At the emperor's further insistence, and for their own protection they took refuge at the convent of Petrion, where eventually they were joined by Irene Doukaina's mother, Maria of Bulgaria.Botaneiates allowed them to be treated as refugees rather than guests. They were allowed to have family members bring in their own food and were on good terms with the guards from whom they learned the latest news."Alexiad", 2.5.7–9 Anna was highly successful in three important aspects of the revolt: she bought time for her sons to steal imperial horses from the stables and escape the city, she distracted the emperor and gave her sons time to gather and arm their troops and she gave a false sense of security to Botaneiates that there was no real treasonous coup against him. After bribing the Western troops who had guarded the city, Isaac and Alexios Komnenos entered the capital victoriously on April 1, 1081.Finlay, pg. 63During this time, Alexios was rumored to be the lover of Empress Maria of Alania, the daughter of King Bagrat&nbsp;IV of Georgia, who had been successively married to Michael&nbsp;VII Doukas and his successor Nikephoros&nbsp;III Botaneiates, renowned for her beauty.Norwich, pg. 10 Alexios arranged for Maria to stay on the palace grounds, and it was thought that Alexios was considering marrying the erstwhile empress. However, his mother consolidated the Doukas family connection by arranging the Emperor's marriage to Irene Doukaina, granddaughter of the Caesar John Doukas, the uncle of Michael&nbsp;VII, who would not have supported Alexios otherwise. As a measure intended to keep the support of the Doukai, Alexios restored Constantine Doukas, the young son of Michael&nbsp;VII and Maria, as co-emperorNorwich, pg. 12 and a little later betrothed him to his own first-born daughter Anna, who moved into the Mangana Palace with her fiancé and his mother.However, this situation changed drastically when Alexios' first son John&nbsp;II Komnenos was born in 1087:Kazhdan, pg. 658 Anna's engagement to Constantine was dissolved, and she was moved to the main Palace to live with her mother and grandmother. Alexios became estranged from Maria, who was stripped of her imperial title and retired to a monastery, and Constantine Doukas was deprived of his status as co-emperor. Nevertheless, he remained in good relations with the imperial family and succumbed to his weak constitution soon afterwards.
Wars against the Normans, Pechenegs and Tzachas{{Details}}

Alexios' long reign of nearly thirty-seven years was full of struggle. At the very outset, he had to meet the formidable attack of the Normans (led by Robert Guiscard and his son Bohemund), who took Dyrrhachium and Corfu, and laid siege to Larissa in Thessaly (see Battle of Dyrrhachium). Alexios suffered several defeats before being able to strike back with success. He enhanced this by bribing the German king Henry&nbsp;IV with 360,000 gold pieces to attack the Normans in Italy,Norwich, pg. 21 which forced the Normans to concentrate on their defenses at home in 1083–1084. He also secured the alliance of Henry, Count of Monte Sant'Angelo, who controlled the Gargano Peninsula and dated his charters by Alexios' reign. Henry's allegiance was to be the last example of Byzantine political control on peninsular Italy. The Norman danger ended for the time being with Robert Guiscard's death in 1085, and the Byzantines recovered most of their losses.Norwich, pg. 25Next, Alexios had to deal with disturbances in Thrace, where the heretical sects of the Bogomils and the Paulicians revolted and made common cause with the Pechenegs from beyond the Danube.Finlay, pg. 101 Paulician soldiers in imperial service likewise deserted during Alexios' battles with the Normans.Finlay, pg. 78 As soon as the Norman threat had passed, Alexios set out to punish the rebels and deserters, confiscating their lands. This led to a further revolt near Philippopolis, and the commander of the field army in the west, Gregory Pakourianos, was defeated and killed in the ensuing battle. In 1087 the Pechenegs raided into Thrace and Alexios crossed into Moesia to retaliate but failed to take Dorostolon (Silistra).Finlay, pg. 102 During his retreat, the emperor was surrounded and worn down by the Pechenegs, who forced him to sign a truce and pay protection money. In 1090 the Pechenegs invaded Thrace again,Finlay, pg. 104 while Tzachas, the brother-in-law of the Sultan of Rum, launched a fleet and attempted to arrange a joint siege of Constantinople with the Pechenegs.Norwich, pg. 26 Alexios overcame this crisis by entering into an alliance with a horde of 40,000 Cumans, with whose help he crushed the Pechenegs at Levounion in Thrace on 29 April 1091.Norwich, pg. 27This put an end to the Pecheneg threat, but in 1094 the Cumans began to raid the imperial territories in the Balkans. Led by a pretender claiming to be Constantine Diogenes, a long-dead son of the Emperor Romanos&nbsp;IV,Finlay, pg. 86 the Cumans crossed the mountains and raided into eastern Thrace until their leader was eliminated at Adrianople. With the Balkans more or less pacified, Alexios could now turn his attention to Asia Minor, which had been almost completely overrun by the Seljuq Turks.Finlay, pg. 108
Byzantine-Seljuq Wars and the First Crusade{{see}}
By the time Alexios ascended the throne, the Seljuqs had taken most of Asia Minor. Alexios was able to secure much of the coastal regions by sending peasant soldiers to raid the Seljuq camps, but these victories were unable to stop the Turks altogether.Finlay, pg. 111 As early as 1090, Alexios had taken reconciliatory measures towards the Papacy,Norwich, pg. 30 with the intention of seeking western support against the Seljuqs. In 1095 his ambassadors appeared before Pope Urban&nbsp;II at the Council of Piacenza.Canduci, pg. 279 The help which he wanted from the West was simply mercenary forces and not the immense hosts which arrived, to his consternation and embarrassment, after the pope preached the First Crusade at the Council of Clermont later that same year.Norwich, pg. 31 Not quite ready to supply this number of people as they traversed his territories, the emperor saw his Balkan possessions subjected to further pillage at the hands of his own allies.Norwich, pg. 33 Alexios dealt with the first disorganized group of Crusaders, led by the preacher Peter the Hermit, by sending them on to Asia Minor, where they were massacred by the Turks in 1096.Kazhdan, pg. 1479The second and much more formidable host of crusaders gradually made its way to Constantinople, led in sections by Godfrey of Bouillon, Bohemond of Taranto, Raymond&nbsp;IV of Toulouse and other important members of the western nobility.Norwich, pg. 36 Alexios used the opportunity of meeting the crusader leaders separately as they arrived and extracting from them oaths of homage and the promise to turn over conquered lands to the Byzantine Empire.Finlay, pg. 123 Transferring each contingent into Asia, Alexios promised to supply them with provisions in return for their oaths of homage. The crusade was a notable success for Byzantium, as Alexios now recovered a number of important cities and islands. The crusader siege of Nicaea forced the city to surrender to the emperor in 1097, and the subsequent crusader victory at Dorylaion allowed the Byzantine forces to recover much of western Asia Minor.Norwich, pg. 42 John Doukas re-established Byzantine rule in Chios, Rhodes, Smyrna, Ephesus, Sardis, and Philadelphia in 1097–1099. This success is ascribed by Alexios' daughter Anna to his policy and diplomacy, but by the Latin historians of the crusade to his treachery and falseness. In 1099, a Byzantine fleet of 10 ships were sent to assist the Crusaders in capturing Laodicea and other coastal towns as far as Tripoli. The crusaders believed their oaths were made invalid when the Byzantine contingent under Tatikios failed to help them during the siege of Antioch; Bohemund, who had set himself up as Prince of Antioch, briefly went to war with Alexios in the Balkans, but was blockaded by the Byzantine forces and agreed to become Alexios' vassal by the Treaty of Devol in 1108.Norwich, pg. 48
Personal lifeDuring the last twenty years of his life Alexios lost much of his popularity.Norwich, pg. 54 The years were marked by persecution of the followers of the Paulician and Bogomil heresiesFinlay, pg. 81—one of his last acts was to publicly burn at the stake Basil, a Bogomil leader, with whom he had engaged in a theological dispute. In spite of the success of the crusade, Alexios also had to repel numerous attempts on his territory by the Seljuqs in 1110–1117.Norwich, pg. 58Alexios was for many years under the strong influence of an eminence grise, his mother Anna Dalassene, a wise and immensely able politician whom, in a uniquely irregular fashion, he had crowned as Augusta instead of the rightful claimant to the title, his wife Irene Doukaina.Norwich, pg. 59 Dalassena was the effective administrator of the Empire during Alexios' long absences in military campaigns: she was constantly at odds with her daughter-in-law and had assumed total responsibility for the upbringing and education of her granddaughter Anna Komnene.
SuccessionAlexios' last years were also troubled by anxieties over the succession. Although he had crowned his son John&nbsp;II Komnenos co-emperor at the age of five in 1092, John's mother Irene Doukaina wished to alter the succession in favor of her daughter Anna and Anna's husband, Nikephoros Bryennios the Younger.Norwich, pg. 61 Bryennios had been made kaisar (Caesar) and received the newly-created title of panhypersebastos ("honoured above all"), and remained loyal to both Alexios and John. Nevertheless, the intrigues of Irene and Anna disturbed even Alexios' dying hours.
Pretenders and rebelsApart from all of his external enemies, a host of rebels also sought to overthrow Alexios from the imperial throne, thereby posing another major threat to his reign.  Due to the troubled times the empire was enduring, he had by far the greatest number of rebellions against him of all the Byzantine emperors.Finlay, pg. 71  These included:
Pre First Crusade

Raictor, a Byzantine monk who claimed to be the emperor Michael&nbsp;VII. He presented himself to Robert Guiscard who used him as a pretext to launch his invasion of the Byzantine Empire.
A conspiracy in 1084 involving several senators and officers of the army. This was uncovered before too many followers were enlisted. In order to conceal the importance of the conspiracy, Alexios merely banished the wealthiest plotters and confiscated their estates.
Tzachas, a Seljuq Turkic emir who assumed the title of emperor in 1092.Finlay, pg. 72
Constantine Humbertopoulos, who had assisted Alexios in gaining the throne in 1081 conspired against him in 1091 with an Armenian called Ariebes.
John Komnenos, Alexios’ nephew, governor of Dyrrachium, accused of a conspiracy by Theophylact of Bulgaria.
Theodore Gabras, the quasi-independent governor of Trebizond and his son Gregory.
Michael Taronites, the brother-in-law of Alexios.
Nikephoros Diogenes, the son of emperor Romanos&nbsp;IV.
Pseudo-Constantine Diogenes, an impostor who assumed the identity of another of Romanos’ sons, Constantine Diogenes.Finlay, pg. 73
Karykes, the leader of a revolt in Crete.
Rhapsomates, who tried to create an independent kingdom in Cyprus.


Post First Crusade

Salomon, a senator of great wealth who in 1106 engaged in a plot with four brothers of the Anemas family.Finlay, pg. 74
Gregory Taronites, another governor of Trebizond.
The illegitimate descendant of a Bulgarian prince named Aron formed a plot in 1107 to murder Alexios as he was encamped near Thessalonica. The presence of the empress Irene and her attendants, however, made the execution of the plot difficult. In an attempt to have her return to Constantinople, the conspirators produced pamphlets that mocked and slandered the empress, and left them in her tent. A search for the author of the publications uncovered the whole plot, yet Aron was only banished due to his connection of the royal line of Bulgaria, whose blood also flowed in the veins of the empress Irene.Finlay, pg. 75


LegacyAlexios&nbsp;I had stabilized the Byzantine Empire and overcame a dangerous crisis, inaugurating a century of imperial prosperity and success.  He had also profoundly altered the nature of the Byzantine government.Finlay, pg. 69  By seeking close alliances with powerful noble families, Alexios put an end to the tradition of imperial exclusivity and coopted most of the nobility into his extended family and, through it, his government. Those who did not become part of this extended family were deprived of power and prestige.  This measure, which was intended to diminish opposition, was paralleled by the introduction of new courtly dignities, like that of panhypersebastos given to Nikephoros Bryennios, or that of sebastokrator given to the emperor's brother Isaac Komnenos.  Although this policy met with initial success, it gradually undermined the relative effectiveness of imperial bureaucracy by placing family connections over merit. Alexios' policy of integration of the nobility bore the fruit of continuity: every Byzantine emperor who reigned after Alexios&nbsp;I Komnenos was related to him by either descent or marriage.
FamilyBy his marriage with Irene Doukaina, Alexios&nbsp;I had the following children:

Anna Komnene, who married the Caesar Nikephoros Bryennios the Younger.
Maria Komnene, who married (1) Gregory Gabras and (2) Nikephoros Katakalon.
John&nbsp;II Komnenos, who succeeded as emperor.
Andronikos Komnenos, sebastokrator.
Isaac Komnenos, sebastokrator.
Eudokia Komnene, who married Michael Iasites.
Theodora Komnene, who married (1) Constantine Kourtikes and (2) Constantine Angelos. By him she was the grandmother of Emperors Isaac&nbsp;II Angelos and Alexios&nbsp;III Angelos.
Manuel Komnenos
Zoe Komnene.


Sources
Primary Sources

Anna Comnena, The Alexiad, translated E. R. A. Sewter, Penguin Classics, 1969


Secondary Sources

Michael Angold, The Byzantine Empire, 1025–1204, Longman, 1997, 2nd ed., pp. 136–70. ISBN 978-0-582-29468-4
Jonathan Harris, Byzantium and the Crusades, Hambledon, 2003, pp. 33–71. ISBN 978-1-85285-298-6
{{citation}}
Warren Treadgold, A History of the Byzantine State and Society, Stanford Universwity Press, 1997, pp. 612–29. ISBN 978-0-8047-2630-6
{{cite book}}
{{citation}}
{{cite book}}
{{citation}}
{{cite encyclopedia}}
George Finlay, History of the Byzantine and Greek Empires from 1057–1453, Volume 2, William Blackwood &#38; Sons, 1854


References{{Reflist}}
External links

Alexius coinage

{{s-start}}
{{s-hou}}
{{s-reg}}
{{s-bef}}
{{s-ttl}}
{{s-aft}}
{{end}}
{{Roman Emperors}}{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Alexios 01 Komnenos}}












ar:??????? ????? ??????
an:Aleixo I Comneno
be:??????? I ??????
be-x-old:??????? I ??????
bg:??????? I ??????
ca:Aleix I Comnè
cs:Alexios I. Komnenos
cy:Alexios I Komnenos
de:Alexios I. (Byzanz)
el:??????? ?' ????????
es:Alejo I Comneno
eo:Aleksio la 1-a
fa:??????? ???
fr:Alexis Ier Comnène
gl:Aleixo I Comneno
ka:?????? I (????????)
ko:????? 1?
hr:Aleksije I. Komnen
id:Alexius I Komnenus
it:Alessio I di Bisanzio
he:??????? ??????, ???? ???????? ????????
la:Alexius I Comnenus
lt:Aleksijus I Komninas
hu:I. Alexiosz bizánci császár
mk:??????? I ??????
arz:???????? ????? ????????
nl:Alexios I Komnenos
ja:??????1??????
no:Alexios I Komnenos
nn:Alexios I Komnenos
pl:Aleksy I Komnen
pt:Aleixo I Comneno
ro:Alexios I Comnen
ru:??????? I ??????
sq:Aleksi I Komneni
scn:Alessiu I Comnenu
simple:Alexios I Komnenos
sl:Aleksej I. Komnen
sr:???????? I ??????
sh:Aleksije I Komnen
fi:Aleksios I Komnenos
sv:Alexios I Komnenos
tl:Alexios I Komnenos
th:?????????????????????? 1 ????????
tr:I. Aleksios Komnenos
uk:??????? I ??????
zh:??????