title{{Infobox musical artist}}Alexis Korner (19 April 1928 — 1 January 1984) was a blues musician and radio broadcaster, who has sometimes been referred to as "a Founding Father of British Blues".{{Google books}} A major influence on the sound of the British music scene in the 1960s,"Korner, a pioneer and influential musician" retrieved 26 August 2007 Korner was instrumental in bringing together various English blues musicians.
Early careerAlexis Andrew Nicholas Koerner was born in Paris to an Austrian father and a half-Turkish half-Greek mother,{{cite web}}{{cite web}} and spent his childhood in France, Switzerland, and North Africa. He arrived in London in 1940 at the start of the World War II. One memory of his youth was listening to a record by black pianist Jimmy Yancey during a German air raid. He said, "From then on all I wanted to do was play the blues."[{{Allmusic}} Bio at Allmusic.com]After the war, he played piano and guitar (his first guitar was built by friend and author Sydney Hopkins, who wrote Mister God, This Is Anna), and in 1949 joined Chris Barber's Jazz BandJohn Pidgeon's Rock'sbackpagesblog: http://www.rocksbackpagesblogs.com/2009/09/chris-barber-father-of-british-rb/ where he met blues harmonica player Cyril Davies. They started playing together as a duo, formed the influential London Blues and Barrelhouse Club in 1955, and made their first record together in 1957. Korner made is first official record on Decca Records DFE 6286 in the company of Ken Colyer's Skiffle Group his talent extended to playing mandolin on one of the tracks of this rare British ep recorded in London July 28, 1955.Korner brought many American blues artists, previously unknown in England, to perform.{{Google books}}
The 1960s{{Main}}
In 1961, Korner and Davies formed Blues Incorporated,John Pidgeon's Rock'sbackpages blog: http://www.rocksbackpagesblogs.com/2009/09/blues-incorporated-how-british-rb-trashed-trad initially a loose-knit group of musicians with a shared love of electric blues and R&B music. The group included, at various times, such influential musicians as Charlie Watts, Jack Bruce, Ginger Baker, Long John Baldry, Graham Bond, Danny Thompson and Dick Heckstall-Smith. It also attracted a wider crowd of mostly younger fans, some of whom occasionally performed with the group, including Mick Jagger, Keith Richards, Brian Jones, Geoff Bradford, Rod Stewart, John Mayall and Jimmy Page.{{cite book}}One story is that The Rolling Stones went to stay at Korner's house late one night, in the early 1960s, after a performance. They entered in the accepted way, by climbing in through the kitchen window, to find Muddy Waters' band sleeping on the kitchen floor. {{Citation needed}}Although Cyril Davies left the group in 1963, Blues Incorporated continued to record, with Korner at the helm, until 1966. However, by that time its originally stellar line-up and crowd of followers had mostly left to start their own bands. "While his one-time acolytes The Rolling Stones and Cream made the front pages of music magazines all over the world, Korner was relegated to the role of 'elder statesman'."Although he himself was a blues purist, Korner criticised better-known British blues musicians during the blues boom of the late 1960s for their blind adherence to Chicago blues, as if the music came in no other form. He liked to surround himself with jazz musicians and often performed with a horn section drawn from a pool which included, among others, saxophone players Art Themen, Mel Collins, Dick Heckstall-Smith, Lol Coxhill,"COLIN HODGKINSON sessions"retrieved 29 August 2011 Dick Morrissey, John Surman and trombonist Mike Zwerin.
Broadcasting
In the 1960s Korner began a media career, working initially as a show business interviewer and then on ITV's Five O'Clock Club, a children's TV show. Korner also wrote about blues for the music papers, and continued to maintain his own career as a blues artist, especially in Europe. On 17 October 1967, Korner interviewed The Jimi Hendrix Experience for the BBC radio show Top Gear. Some of these tracks, including audio of Korner himself, appear on the Hendrix double-CD BBC Sessions, including Korner playing slide guitar on (I'm Your) Hoochie Coochie Man.While touring Scandinavia he first joined forces with guitarist and singer Peter Thorup, together forming the band New Church, who were one of the support bands at the Rolling Stones Free Concert at Hyde Park on 5 July 1969. Jimmy Page reportedly found out about a new singer, Robert Plant, who had been jamming with Korner, who wondered why Plant had not yet been discovered. Plant and Korner were in the process of recording a full album with Plant on vocals until Page had asked him to join "the New Yardbirds", aka Led Zeppelin. Only two songs are in circulation from these recordings: "Steal Away" and "Operator". Alexis Korner gave one of his last Radio interviews to BBC Midlands on the "Record Collectors Show" with Mike Adams and the Late Chris Savory.
1970s{{Main}}

In 1970 Korner and Thorup formed a big band ensemble, C.C.S. - short for The Collective Consciousness Society - which had several hit singles produced by Mickie Most, including a version of Led Zeppelin's "Whole Lotta Love" which was used as the theme for BBC's Top Of The Pops between 1971 and 1981. Another instrumental called "Brother" was used as the theme to the BBC Radio 1 Top 20/40 when Tom Browne/Simon Bates presented the programme in the 1970s. This was the period of Korner's greatest commercial success in the UK.
1970s to 1984
In 1973, he formed another group, Snape, with Boz Burrell, Mel Collins, and Ian Wallace, who were previously together in King Crimson. Korner also played on B. B. King's In London album, and cut his own, similar 'supersession' album; Get Off My Cloud, with Keith Richards, Peter Frampton, Nicky Hopkins and members of Joe Cocker's Grease Band. In the mid 1970s, while touring Germany, Korner established an intensive working relationship with bassist Colin Hodgkinson who played for the support act Back Door. They would continue to collaborate right up until Korner's death.In the 1970s Korner's main career was in broadcasting. In 1973 he presented a unique 6-part documentary on BBC Radio 1, The Rolling Stones Story,Radiorewind.co.uk -  retrieved 26 August 2007 and in 1977 he established a Sunday night blues and soul show on Radio 1, "Alexis Korner's Blues and Soul show", which ran until 1981. He also used his gravelly voice to great effect as an advertising voice-over artist. In 1978, for Korner's 50th birthday, an all-star concert was held featuring many of his friends mentioned above, as well as Eric Clapton, Paul Jones, Chris Farlowe, Zoot Money and other friends, which was later released as The Party Album, and as a video.In 1981, he joined another "supergroup", Rocket 88, a project led by Ian Stewart based on boogie-woogie keyboard players, which featured a rhythm section comprising Jack Bruce and Charlie Watts, among others, as well as a horn section. They toured Europe and released an album on Atlantic Records. He played in Italy with Paul Jones and the Blues Society of Italian bluesman Guido Toffoletti.Korner married Roberta, daughter of art critic, Robert Melville.The Times, Obituaries: Alexis Korner 3 January 1984 He died of lung cancer in London on 1 January 1984 and was survived by a daughter, musician Sappho Gillett Korner, and two sons, guitarist Nicholas (Nico) Korner and sound engineer Damian Korner.

Bibliography

Bob Brunning (1986) Blues: The British Connection, London: Helter Skelter, 2002, ISBN 1-900924-41-2
Bob Brunning, The Fleetwood Mac Story: Rumours and Lies (Omnibus Press, 2004, foreword of B.B.King)
Dick Heckstall-Smith (2004) The safest place in the world: A personal history of British Rhythm and blues, Clear Books, ISBN 0-7043-2696-5 - First Edition : Blowing The Blues - Fifty Years Playing The British Blues
Christopher Hjort Strange brew: Eric Clapton and the British blues boom, 1965-1970, foreword by John Mayall,Jawbone (2007)ISBN 1-906002002
Harry Shapiro Alexis Korner: The Biography, Bloomsbury Publishing PLC, London 1997, Discography by Mark Troster, ISBN 0-7475-3163-3


References{{Reflist}}
External links

[{{Allmusic}} Biography at Allmusic]
Alexis Korner page at Radio Rewind
{{worldcat id}}

{{Use dmy dates}}{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Korner, Alexis}}


















cs:Alexis Korner
da:Alexis Korner
de:Alexis Korner
es:Alexis Korner
fr:Alexis Korner
hr:Alexis Korner
it:Alexis Korner
hu:Alexis Korner
ja:??????????
nn:Alexis Korner
pl:Alexis Korner
ru:??????, ???????
sv:Alexis Korner