title{{About}}
Alkaloids are a group of naturally occurring chemical compounds that contain mostly basic nitrogen atoms. This group also includes some related compounds with neutralIUPAC. Compendium of Chemical Terminology, 2nd ed. (The "Gold Book"). Compiled by A. D. McNaught and A. Wilkinson. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford (1997) ISBN 0-9678550-9-8 {{doi}} and even weakly acidic properties.R. H. F. Manske. The Alkaloids. Chemistry and Physiology. Volume VIII. - New York: Academic Press, 1965, p. 673 Also some synthetic compounds of similar structure are attributed to alkaloids.Robert Alan Lewis. Lewis' dictionary of toxicology. CRC Press, 1998, p. 51 ISBN 1-56670-223-2 In addition to carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen, alkaloids may also contain oxygen, sulfur and more rarely other elements such as chlorine, bromine, and phosphorus.Chemical Encyclopedia: alkaloids Alkaloids are produced by a large variety of organisms, including bacteria, fungi, plants, and animals, and are part of the group of natural products (also called secondary metabolites). Many alkaloids can be purified from crude extracts by acid-base extraction. Many alkaloids are toxic to other organisms. They often have pharmacological effects and are used as medications, as recreational drugs, or in entheogenic rituals. Examples are the local anesthetic and stimulant cocaine; the stimulant caffeine; nicotine; the analgesic morphine; the antibacterial berberine; the anticancer compound vincrinstine; the antihypertension agent resepine; the cholinomimeric galatamine; the spasmolysis agent atropine; the vasodilator vincamine; the anti-arhythmia compound quinidine; the anti-asthma therapeutic ephedrine; and the antimalarial drug quinine.
Although alkaloids act on a diversity of metabolic systems in humans and other animals, they almost uniformly invoke a bitter taste.{{cite book}}The boundary between alkaloids and other nitrogen-containing natural compounds is not clear-cut.Robert A. Meyers Encyclopedia of Physical Science and Technology, Eighteen-Volume Set, Third Edition. - Alkaloids ISBN 0-12-227411-3 Compounds like amino acid peptides, proteins, nucleotides, nucleic acid, amines, and antibiotics are usually not called alkaloids. Natural compounds containing nitrogen in the exocyclic position (mescaline, serotonin, dopamine, etc.) are usually attributed to amines rather than alkaloids.Leland J. Cseke Natural Products from Plants Second Edition. - CRC, 2006, p. 30 ISBN 0-8493-2976-0 Some authors, however, consider alkaloids a special case of amines.A. William Johnson Invitation to Organic Chemistry, Jones and Bartlett, 1999, p. 433 ISBN 0-7637-0432-6Raj K Bansal A Text Book of Organic Chemistry. 4th Edition, New Age International, 2004, p. 644 ISBN 81-224-1459-1Aniszewski, p. 110
NamingThe name "alkaloids" ({{lang-de}}) was introduced in 1819 by the German chemist Carl F.W. Meissner,Biographical information about German pharmacist Carl Friedrich Wilhelm Meißner (1792-1853) is available in the German Wikipedia:  http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carl_Friedrich_Wilhelm_Mei%C3%9Fner  (in German). and is derived from late Latin root {{lang-la}} (which, in turn, comes from the Arabic al qualja - "ashes of plants") and the suffix {{lang-el}} - "like".In the penultimate sentence of his article [W. Meissner (1819) "Über Pflanzenalkalien: II. Über ein neues Pflanzenalkali (Alkaloid)" (On plant alkalis: II. On a new plant alkali (alkaloid)), Journal für Chemie und Physik, vol. 25, pp. 377–381] Meissner wrote "Überhaupt scheint es mir auch angemessen, die bis jetzt bekannten Pflanzenstoffe nicht mit dem Namen Alkalien, sondern Alkaloide zu belegen, da sie doch in manchen Eigenschaften von den Alkalien sehr abweichen, sie würden daher in dem Abschnitt der Pflanzenchemie vor den Pflanzensäuren ihre Stelle finden." (In general, it seems appropriate to me to impose on the known plant substances not the name "alkalis" but "alkaloids", since they differ greatly in some properties from the alkalis; among the chapters of plant chemistry, they would therefore find their place before plant acids [since "Alkaloid" would precede "Säure" (acid)].) However, the term came into wide use only after the publication of a review article by O. Jacobsen in the chemical dictionary of Albert Ladenburg in the 1880s.Hesse, pp. 1–3There is no unique method of naming alkaloids.Hesse, p. 5 Many individual names are formed by adding the suffix "ine" to the species or generic alkaloids.The suffix "ine" is a Greek feminine patronymic suffix and means "daughter of"; hence, for example, "atropine" means "daughter of Atropa (belladonna)".  See:  https://webspace.yale.edu/chem125/125/history99/5Valence/Nomenclature/alkanenames.html  . For example, atropine is isolated from the plant Atropa belladonna, strychnine is obtained from the seed of Strychnine tree. If several alkaloids are extracted from one plant then their names often contain suffixes "idine", "anine", "aline", "inine", etc. There are also at least 86 alkaloids containing the root "vin" (extracted from the Vinca plant).Hesse, p. 7
HistoryAlkaloid-containing plants were used by humans since ancient times for therapeutic and recreational purposes. For example, medicinal plants have been known in the Mesopotamia at least around 2000 BC.Aniszewski, p. 182 The Odyssey of Homer referred to a gift given to Helen by the Egyptian queen, a drug bringing oblivion. It is believed that the gift was an opium-containing drug.Hesse, p. 338 A Chinese book on houseplants written in 1st-3rd centuries BC mentioned a medical use of Ephedra and opium poppies.Hesse, p. 304 Also, coca leaves were used by South American Indians since ancient times.Hesse, p. 350 Extracts from plants containing toxic alkaloids, such as aconitine and tubocurarine, were used since antiquity for poisoning arrows.
Studies of alkaloids began in the 19th century. In 1804, the German chemist Friedrich Sertürner isolated from opium a "soporific principle" ({{lang-la}}), which he called "morphium" in honor of Morpheus, the Greek god of dreams; in German and some other Central-European languages, this is still the name of the drug. The term "morphine", used in English and French, was given by the French physicist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac). A significant contribution to the chemistry of alkaloids in the early years of its development was made by the French researchers Pierre Joseph Pelletier and Joseph Bienaimé Caventou, who discovered quinine (1820) and strychnine (1818). Several other alkaloids were discovered around that time, including xanthine (1817), atropine (1819), caffeine (1820), coniine (1827), nicotine (1828), colchicine (1833), sparteine (1851), and cocaine (1860).Hesse, pp. 313–316The first complete synthesis of an alkaloid was achieved in 1886 by the German chemist Albert Ladenburg. He produced coniine by reacting 2-methylpyridine with acetaldehyde and reducing the resulting 2-propenyl pyridine with sodium.TSB: ConiineHesse, p. 204 The development of the chemistry of alkaloids was accelerated by the emergence of spectroscopic and chromatographic methods in the 20th century, so that by 2008 more than 12,000 alkaloids had been identified.Begley Encyclopedia of Chemical Biology: Natural Products in Plants, Chemical Diversity of
Classification
Compared with most other classes of natural compounds, alkaloids are characterized by a great structural diversity and there is no uniform classification of alkaloids.Hesse, p. 11 First classification methods have historically combined alkaloids by the common natural source, e.g., a certain type of plants. This classification was justified by the lack of knowledge about the chemical structure of alkaloids and is now considered obsolete.Orekhov, p. 6More recent classifications are based on similarity of the carbon skeleton (e.g., indole-, isoquinoline-, and pyridine-like) or biogenetic precursor (ornithine, lysine, tyrosine, tryptophan, etc.). However, they require compromises in borderline cases; for example, nicotine contains a pyridine fragment from nicotinamide and pyrrolidine part from ornithineAniszewski, p. 109 and therefore can be assigned to both classes.Dewick, p. 307Alkaloids are often divided into the following major groups:Hesse, p. 12

&#34;True alkaloids&#34;, which contain nitrogen in the heterocycle and originate from amino acids.Plemenkov, p. 223 Their characteristic examples are atropine, nicotine, and morphine. This group also includes some alkaloids that besides nitrogen heterocycle contain terpene (e.g., evonineAniszewski, p. 108) or peptide fragments (e.g. ergotamineHesse, p. 84). This group also includes piperidine alkaloids coniine and coniceineHesse, p. 31 although they do not originate from amino acids.Dewick, p. 381
&#34;Protoalkaloids&#34;, which contain nitrogen and also originate from amino acids. Examples include mescaline, adrenaline and ephedrine.
Polyamine alkaloids – derivatives of putrescine, spermidine, and spermine.
Peptide and cyclopeptide alkaloids.{{cite journal}}
Pseudalkaloids – alkaloid-like compounds that do not originate from amino acids.Aniszewski, p. 11 This group includes, terpene-like and steroid-like alkaloids,Plemenkov, p. 246 as well as purine-like alkaloids such as caffeine, theobromine and theophylline.Aniszewski, p. 12 Some authors classify as pseudoalkaloids such compounds such as ephedrine and cathinone. Those originate from the amino acid phenylalanine, but acquire their nitrogen atom not from the amino acid but through transamination.Dewick, p. 382

Some alkaloids do not have the carbon skeleton characteristic of their group. So, galantamine and homoaporphines do not contain isoquinoline fragment, but are, in general, attributed to isoquinoline alkaloids.Hesse, pp. 44, 53Main classes of monomeric alkaloids are listed in the table below: 

Class Major groups Main synthesis steps Examples 
Alkaloids with nitrogen heterocycles (true alkaloids) 
Pyrrolidine derivativesPlemenkov, p. 224
  Ornithine or arginine ? putrescine ? N-methylputrescine ? N-methyl-?1-pyrroline Aniszewski, p. 75 Cuscohygrine, hygrine, hygroline, stachydrineOrekhov, p. 33 
Tropane derivativesChemical Encyclopedia: Tropan alkaloids
 Atropine groupSubstitution in positions 3, 6 or 7  Ornithine or arginine ? putrescine ? N-methylputrescine ? N-methyl-?1-pyrroline  Atropine, scopolamine, hyoscyamineHesse, p. 34 
Cocaine group Substitution in positions 2 and 3  Cocaine, ecgonine Aniszewski, p. 27 
Pyrrolizidine derivativesChemical Encyclopedia: Pyrrolizidine alkaloids
 Non-esters In plants: ornithine or arginine ? putrescine ? homospermidine ? retronecine  Retronecine, heliotridine, laburnine Plemenkov, p. 229 
Complex esters of monocarboxylic acids Indicine, lindelophin, sarracine  
Macrocyclic diesters Platyphylline, trichodesmine 
1-aminopyrrolizidines (lolines) In fungi: L-proline + L-homoserine ? N-(3-amino-3-carboxypropyl)proline ? norloline{{cite journal}}{{cite journal}} Loline, N-formylloline, N-acetylloline{{cite journal}} 
Piperidine derivativesPlemenkov, p. 225
  Lysine ? cadaverine ? ?1-piperideine Aniszewski, p. 95 Sedamine, lobeline, anaferine, piperine Orekhov, p. 80 
 Octanoic acid ? coniceine ? coniine  Coniine, coniceine  
Quinolizidine derivativesChemical Encyclopedia: Quinolizidine alkaloidsJ. E. Saxton The Alkaloids. A Specialist Periodical Report. Volume 1. - London: The Chemical Society, 1971, p. 93
 Lupinine group Lysine ? cadaverine ? ?1-piperideine Aniszewski, p. 98 Lupinine, nupharidin  
Cytisine group Cytisine  
Sparteine group Sparteine, lupanine, anahygrine 
Matrine group Matrine, oxymatrine, allomatridineJ. E. Saxton The Alkaloids. A Specialist Periodical Report. Volume 1. - London: The Chemical Society, 1971, p. 91{{cite journal}} 
Ormosanine group Ormosanine, piptantineJ. E. Saxton The Alkaloids. A Specialist Periodical Report. Volume 1. - London: The Chemical Society, 1971, p. 92 
Indolizidine derivativesDewick, p. 310
  Lysine ? ?-semialdehyde of ?-aminoadipic acid ? pipecolic acid ? 1 indolizidinone Aniszewski, p. 96 Swainsonine, castanospermine Aniszewski, p. 97 
Pyridine derivativesPlemenkov, p. 227Chemical Encyclopedia: pyridine alkaloids
 Simple derivatives of pyridine Nicotinic acid ? dihydronicotinic acid ? 1,2-dihydropyridine Aniszewski, p. 107 Trigonelline, ricinine, arecoline Aniszewski, p. 85 
Polycyclic noncondensing pyridine derivatives Nicotine, nornicotine, anabasine, anatabine  
Polycyclic condensed pyridine derivatives Actinidine, gentianine, pediculinine Plemenkov, p. 228 
Sesquiterpene pyridine derivatives Nicotinic acid, isoleucine  Evonine, hippocrateine, triptonine  
Isoquinoline derivatives and related alkaloids Hesse, p. 36
 Simple derivatives of isoquinoline Chemical Encyclopedia: isoquinoline alkaloids Tyrosine or phenylalanine ? dopamine or tyramine (for alkaloids Amarillis) Aniszewski, pp. 77–78Tadhg P. Begley.Encyclopedia of Chemical Biology: Alkaloid Biosynthesis Salsoline, lophocerine  
Derivatives of 1- and 3-isoquinolines J. E. Saxton The Alkaloids. A Specialist Periodical Report. Volume 3. - London: The Chemical Society, 1973, p. 122 N-methylcoridaldine, noroxyhydrastinine  
Derivatives of 1- and 4-phenyltetrahydroisoquinolines  Cryptostilin Hesse, p. 54 
Derivatives of 5-naftil-isoquinoline Hesse, p. 37 Ancistrocladine  
Derivatives of 1- and 2-benzyl-izoquinolines Hesse, p. 38 Papaverine, laudanosine, sendaverine 
Cularine groupHesse, p. 46 Cularine, yagonine  
Pavines and isopavines Hesse, p. 50 Argemonine, amurensin  
Benzopyrrocolines {{cite journal}} Cryptaustoline  
Protoberberines  Berberine, canadine, ophiocarpine, mecambridine, corydaline Hesse, p. 47 
Phthalidisoquinolines  Hydrastine, narcotine (Noscapine) Hesse, p. 39 
Spirobenzylisoquinolines  Fumaricine  
Ipecacuanha alkaloidsHesse, p. 41 Emetine, protoemetine, ipecoside  
Benzophenanthridines  Sanguinarine, oxynitidine, corynoloxine Hesse, p. 49 
Aporphines  Glaucine, coridine, liriodenine Hesse, p. 44 
Proaporphines  Pronuciferine, glaziovine  
Homoaporphines J. E. Saxton The Alkaloids. A Specialist Periodical Report. Volume 3. - London: The Chemical Society, 1973, p. 164 Kreysiginine, multifloramine  
Homoproaporphines  Bulbocodine  
MorphinesHesse, p. 51 Morphine, codeine, thebaine, sinomenine Plemenkov, p. 236 
Homomorphines J. E. Saxton The Alkaloids. A Specialist Periodical Report. Volume 3. - London: The Chemical Society, 1973, p. 163 Kreysiginine, androcymbine  
Tropoloisoquinolines  Imerubrine  
Azofluoranthenes  Rufescine, imeluteine J. E. Saxton The Alkaloids. A Specialist Periodical Report. Volume 3. - London: The Chemical Society, 1973, p. 168 
Amaryllis alkaloidsHesse, p. 52 Lycorine, ambelline, tazettine, galantamine, montanine Hesse, p. 53 
Erythrite alkaloids Erysodine, erythroidine  
Phenanthrene derivatives  Atherosperminine  
Protopins  Protopine, oxomuramine, corycavidine  
Aristolactam  Doriflavin  
Oxazole derivativesPlemenkov, p. 241
  Tyrosine ? tyramine Arnold Brossi The Alkaloids: Chemistry and Pharmacology, Volume 35. - Academic Press, 1989, p. 261 Annuloline, halfordinol, texaline, texamineArnold Brossi The Alkaloids: Chemistry and Pharmacology, Volume 35. - Academic Press, 1989, pp. 260–263 
Isoxazole derivatives
  Ibotenic acid ? Muscimol Ibotenic acid, Muscimol 
Thiazole derivativesPlemenkov, p. 242
  1-Deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate (DOXP), tyrosine, cysteine Tadhg P. Begley.Encyclopedia of Chemical Biology: Cofactor Biosynthesis Nostocyclamide, thiostreptone {{cite journal}} 
Quinazoline derivativesChemical Encyclopedia: Quinazoline alkaloids
 3,4-Dihydro-4-quinazolone derivatives Anthranilic acid or phenylalanine or ornithine Aniszewski, p. 106 FebrifugineAniszewski, p. 105 
1,4-Dihydro-4-quinazolone derivatives Glycorine, arborine, glycosminine 
Pyrrolidine and piperidine quinazoline derivatives Vazicine (peganine)  
Acridine derivatives
  Anthranilic acid {{cite journal}} Rutacridone, acronicinePlemenkov, pp. 231, 246Hesse, p. 58 
Quinoline derivativesPlemenkov, p. 231Chemical Encyclopedia: Quinoline alkaloids
 Simple derivatives of quinoline derivatives of 2 - quinolones and 4-quinolone Anthranilic acid ? 3-carboxyquinoline Aniszewski, p. 114 Cusparine, echinopsine, evocarpineOrekhov, p. 205Hesse, p. 55 
Tricyclic terpenoids FlindersinePlemenkov, p. 232 
Furanoquinoline derivatives Dictamnine, fagarine, skimmianineOrekhov, p. 212Aniszewski, p. 118 
Quinines Tryptophan ? tryptamine ? strictosidine (with secologanin) ? korinanteal ? cinhoninon  Quinine quinidine cinchonine, cinhonidine  
Indole derivatives

{{See also}} Non-isoprene indole alkaloids 
Simple indole derivatives Aniszewski, p. 112 Tryptophan ? tryptamine or 5-hydroxitriptofan Aniszewski, p. 113 Serotonin, psilocybin, dimethyltryptamine (DMT), bufotenin Hesse, p. 15J. E. Saxton The Alkaloids. A Specialist Periodical Report. Volume 1. - London: The Chemical Society, 1971, p. 467 
Simple derivatives of ?-carboline Dewick, p. 349-350 Harman, harmine, harmaline, eleagnine  
Pyrroloindole alkaloids Aniszewski, p. 119 Physostigmine (eserine), etheramine, physovenine, eptastigmine 
Semiterpenoid indole alkaloids 
Ergot alkaloids Tryptophan ? chanoclavine ? agroclavine ? elimoclavine ? paspalic acid ? lysergic acid  Ergotamine, ergobasine, ergosineHesse, p. 29 
Monoterpenoid indole alkaloids 
Corynanthe type alkaloids Tryptophan ? tryptamine ? strictosidine (with secologanin)  Ajmalicine, sarpagine, vobasine, ajmaline, yohimbine, reserpine, mitragynine,Hesse, pp. 23-26J. E. Saxton The Alkaloids. A Specialist Periodical Report. Volume 1. - London: The Chemical Society, 1971, p. 169 group strychnine and (Strychnine brucine, aquamicine, vomicine J. E. Saxton The Alkaloids. A Specialist Periodical Report. Volume 5. - London: The Chemical Society, 1975, p. 210) 
Iboga-type alkaloids Ibogamine, ibogaine, voacangine 
Aspidosperma-type alkaloids Vincamine, vincotine, aspidospermineHesse, pp. 17-18Dewick, p. 357 
Imidazole derivatives
  Directly from histidineAniszewski, p. 104 Histamine, pilocarpine, pilosine, stevensine 
Purine derivativesHesse, p. 72
  Xanthosine (formed in purine biosynthesis) ? 7 methylxantosine ? 7-methyl xanthine ? theobromine ? caffeine  Caffeine theobromine theophylline saxitoxin Hesse, p. 73Dewick, p. 396 
Alkaloids with nitrogen in the side chain (protoalkaloids) 
?-Phenylethylamine derivatives
  Tyrosine or phenylalanine ? dioxyphenilalanine ? dopamine ? adrenaline and mescaline tyrosine ? tyramine phenylalanine ? 1-phenylpropane-1,2-dione ? cathinone ? ephedrine and pseudoephedrine PlantCyc Pathway: ephedrine biosynthesis Tyramine, ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, mescaline, cathinone, catecholamines (adrenaline, noradrenaline, dopamine)Hesse, p. 76 
Colchicine alkaloids Chemical Encyclopedia: colchicine alkaloids
  Tyrosine or phenylalanine ? dopamine ? autumnaline ? colchicine Aniszewski, p. 77 Colchicine, colchamine 
Muscarine Hesse, p. 81
  Glutamic acid ? 3-ketoglutamic acid ? muscarine (with pyruvic acid)Arnold Brossi The Alkaloids: Chemistry and Pharmacology, Volume 23. - Academic Press, 1984, p. 376 Muscarine, allomuscarine, epimuscarine, epiallomuscarine 
BenzylamineHesse, p. 77
  Phenylalanine with valine, leucine or isoleucineArnold Brossi The Alkaloids: Chemistry and Pharmacology, Volume 23. - Academic Press, 1984, p. 268 Capsaicin, dihydrocapsaicin, nordihydrocapsaicin Arnold Brossi The Alkaloids: Chemistry and Pharmacology, Volume 23. - Academic Press, 1984, p. 231 
Polyamines alkaloids 
Putrescine derivativesHesse, p. 82
  ornithine ? putrescine ? spermidine ? spermineSpermine Biosynthesis Paucine  
Spermidine derivatives
  Lunarine, codonocarpine 
Spermine derivatives
  Verbascenine, aphelandrine  
Peptide (cyclopeptide) alkaloids 
Peptide alkaloids with a 13-membered cycle Plemenkov, p. 243 Numularine C type From different amino acids  Numularine C, numularine S  
Ziziphin type Ziziphin A, sativanine H  
Peptide alkaloids with a 14-membered cycle  Frangulanine type Frangulanine, scutianine J  
Scutianine A type Scutianine A  
Integerrine type Integerrine, discarine D  
Amphibine F type Amphibine F, spinanine A  
Amfibine B type Amphibine B, lotusine C  
Peptide alkaloids with a 15-membered cycle  Mucronine A type Mucronine A  
Pseudoalkaloids (terpenes and steroids) 
Diterpenes 
 Licoctonine type Mevalonic acid ? izopentenilpyrophosfate ? geranyl pyrophosphate Chemical Encyclopedia: TerpenesTadhg P. Begley.Encyclopedia of Chemical Biology: Natural Products: An Overview Aconitine, delphinine {{cite journal}} 
SteroidsHesse, p. 88
  Cholesterol, arginineDewick, p. 388 Solasodine, solanidine, veralkaminePlemenkov, p. 247 

Properties
Most alkaloids contain oxygen; those compounds are usually colorless crystals at ambient conditions. Oxygen-free alkaloids, such as nicotineTSB: Nicotine or coniine, are typically volatile, colorless, oily liquids.Grinkevich, p. 131 Some alkaloids are colored, like berberine (yellow) and sanguinarine (orange).Most alkaloids are weak bases, but some are amphoteric, for example theobromine and theophylline.G. A. Spiller Caffeine, CRC Press, 1997 ISBN 0-8493-2647-8 Most alkaloids are poorly soluble in water but readily dissolve in organic solvents, such as diethyl ether, chloroform and 1,2-dichloroethane. However, caffeine dissolves well in boiling water. With acids, alkaloids form salts of various strengths. Those salts are usually soluble in water and alcohol and poorly soluble in most organic solvents. Exceptions include scopolamine hydrobromide, which is soluble in organic solvents and water-soluble quinine sulfate.Most alkaloids have a bitter taste. It is believed that plants evolved the ability to produce these bitter substances, many of which are poisonous, in order to protect themselves from animals; however, animals in turn evolved the ability to detoxify alkaloids.Fattorusso, p. 53  Some alkaloids can produce developmental defects in the offspring of animals that consume them but cannot detoxify them.  A characteristic example is the alkaloid cyclopamine, which is present in the leaves of corn lily. During the 1950s, up to 25% lambs born by sheep that had grazed on corn lily suffered serious facial defects. Those defects ranged from deformed jaws to cyclopia (see picture). After decades of research, in 1980s, the substance that was responsible for the deformities was identified as the alkaloid 11-deoxyjervine, which was renamed cyclopamine.{{cite book}}
Distribution in natureAlkaloids are generated by various living organisms, especially by higher plants – about 10 to 25% of those contain alkaloids.Aniszewski, p. 13Orekhov, p. 11 Therefore, in the past the term "alkaloid" was associated with plants.Hesse, p.4The alkaloids content in plants is usually within a few percent and is inhomogeneous over the plant tissues. Depending on the type of plants, the maximum concentration is observed in the leaves (black henbane), fruits or seeds (Strychnine tree), root (Rauwolfia serpentina) or bark (cinchona).Grinkevich, pp. 122-123 Furthermore, different tissues of the same plants may contain different alkaloids.Orekhov, p. 12Beside plants, alkaloids are found in certain types of fungi, such as psilocybin in the fungus of the genus Psilocybe, and in animals, such as bufotenin in the skin of some toads. Many marine organisms also contain alkaloids.Fattorusso, p. XVII Some amines, such as adrenaline and serotonin, which play an important role in higher animals, are similar to alkaloids in their structure and biosynthesis and are sometimes called alkaloids.Aniszewski, pp. 110–111
ExtractionBecause of the structural diversity of alkaloids, there is no single method of their extraction from natural raw materials.Hesse, p. 116 Most methods exploit the property of most alkaloids to be soluble in organic solvents but not in water, and the opposite tendency of their salts. Most plants contain several alkaloids. Their mixture is extracted first and then individual alkaloids are separated.Grinkevich, p. 132 Plants are thoroughly ground before extraction.Grinkevich, p. 5 Most alkaloids are present in the raw plants in the form of salts of organic acids. The extracted alkaloids may remain salts or change into bases. Base extraction is achieved by processing the raw material with alkaline solutions and extracting the alkaloid bases with organic solvents, such as 1,2-dichloroethane, chloroform, diethyl ether or benzene. Then, the impurities are dissolved by weak acids; this converts alkaloid bases into salts that are washed away with water. If necessary, an aqueous solution of alkaloid salts is again made alkaline and treated with an organic solvent. The process is repeated until the desired purity is achieved.In the acidic extraction, the raw plant material is processed by a weak acidic solution (e.g., acetic acid in water, ethanol, or methanol). A base is then added to convert alkaloids to basic forms that are extracted with organic solvent (if the extraction was performed with alcohol, it is removed first, and the remainder is dissolved in water). The solution is purified as described above.Grinkevich, pp. 132-134Alkaloids are separated from their mixture using their different solubility in certain solvents and different reactivity with certain reagents or by distillation.Grinkevich, pp. 134-136
BiosynthesisBiological precursors of most alkaloids are amino acids, such as ornithine, lysine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, tryptophan, histidine, aspartic acid, and anthranilic acid.Plemenkov, p. 253 Nicotinic acid can be synthesized from tryptophan or aspartic acid. Ways of alkaloid biosynthesis are too numerous and cannot be easily classified. However, there are a few typical reactions involved in the biosynthesis of various classes of alkaloids, including synthesis of Schiff bases and Mannich reaction.
Synthesis of Schiff bases{{Main}}Schiff bases can be obtained by reacting amines with ketones or aldehydes.Plemenkov, p. 254 These reactions are a common method of producing C=N bonds.Dewick, p. 19In the biosynthesis of alkaloids, such reactions may take place within a molecule, such as in the synthesis of piperidine:
Mannich reaction{{Main}}An integral component of the Mannich reaction, in addition to an amine and a carbonyl compound, is a carbanion, which plays the role of the nucleophile in the nucleophilic addition to the ion formed by the reaction of the amine and the carbonyl.The Mannich reaction can proceed both intermolecularly and intramolecularly:Plemenkov, p. 255Dewick, p. 305
Dimer alkaloids
In addition to the described above monomeric alkaloids, there are also dimeric, and even trimeric and tetrameric alkaloids formed upon condensation of two, three, and four monomeric alkaloids. Dimeric alkaloids are usually formed from monomers of the same type through the following mechanisms:Hesse, pp. 91–105

Mannich reaction, resulting in, e.g., voacamine
Michael reaction (villalstonine)
Condensation of aldehydes with amines (toxiferine)
Oxidative addition of phenols (dauricine, tubocurarine)
Lactonization (carpaine).

<gallery widths="220px" perrow="3">
File:Voacamine chemical structure.png|Voacamine
File:Villalstonine.svg|Villalstonine
File:Toxiferine I.png|Toxiferine
File:Dauricine.svg|Dauricine
File:Tubocurarine.svg|Tubocurarine
File:Carpaine.png|Carpaine
</gallery>

The biological role
The role of alkaloids for living organisms that produce them is still unclear.Aniszewski, p. 142 It was initially assumed that the alkaloids are the final products of nitrogen metabolism in plants, as urea in mammals. It was later shown that alkaloid concentrations varies over time, and this hypothesis was refuted.Most of the known functions of alkaloids are related to protection. For example, aporphine alkaloid liriodenine produced by the tulip tree protects it from parasitic mushrooms. In addition, presence of alkaloids in the plant prevents insects and chordate animals from eating it. However, some animals adapted to alkaloids and even use them in their own metabolism.Hesse, pp. 283-291 Such alkaloid-related substances as serotonin, dopamine and histamine are important neurotransmitters in animals. Alkaloids are also known to regulate plant growth.Aniszewski, pp. 142-143
Applications
In medicineMedical use of alkaloid plants has a long history, and, thus, when the first alkaloids were synthesized in the 19th century, they immediately found application in clinical practice.Hesse, p. 303 Many alkaloids are still used in medicine, usually in the form of salts, including the following:Hesse, pp. 303-309:

Alkaloid Action 
Ajmaline antiarrhythmic 
Atropine, scopolamine, hyoscyamine anticholinergic 
Vinblastine, vincristine antitumor 
Vincamine vasodilating, antihypertensive 
Codeine cough medicine 
Cocaine anesthetic 
Colchicine remedy for gout 
Morphine analgesic 
Reserpine antihypertensive 
Tubocurarine Muscle relaxant 
Physostigmine inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase 
Quinidine antiarrhythmic 
Quinine antipyretics, antimalarial 
Emetine antiprotozoal agent 
Ergot alkaloids sympathomimetic, vasodilator, antihypertensive 
Many synthetic and semisynthetic drugs are structural modifications of the alkaloids, which were designed to enhance or change the primary effect of the drug and reduce unwanted side-effects.Hesse, p. 309 For example, naloxone, an opioid receptor antagonist, is a derivative of thebaine that is present in opium.Dewick, p. 335<gallery widths="200px" perrow="2">
File:Thebaine skeletal.svg|Thebaine
File:Naloxone.svg|Naloxone
</gallery>

In agriculturePrior to the development of a wide range of relatively low-toxic synthetic pesticides, some alkaloids, such as salts of nicotine and anabasine, were used as insecticides. Their use was limited by their high toxicity to humans.György Matolcsy, Miklós Nádasy, Viktor Andriska Pesticide chemistry, Elsevier, 2002, pp. 21-22 ISBN 0-444-98903-X
Use as psychoactive drugsPreparations of plants containing alkaloids and their extracts, and later pure alkaloids, have long been used as psychoactive substances. Cocaine and cathinone are stimulants of the central nervous system.Veselovskaya, p. 75Hesse, p. 79 Mescaline and many of indole alkaloids (such as psilocybin, dimethyltryptamine and ibogaine) have hallucinogenic effect.Veselovskaya, p. 136Geoffrey A. Cordell The Alkaloids: Chemistry and Biology. Volume 56, Elsevier, 2001, p. 8 Morphine and codeine are strong narcotic pain killers.Veselovskaya, p. 6There are alkaloids that do not have strong psychoactive effect themselves, but are precursors for semi-synthetic psychoactive drugs. For example, ephedrine and pseudoephedrine are used to produce methcathinone and methamphetamine.Veselovskaya, pp. 51-52
See also{{colbegin}}

Amine
Base (chemistry)
Natural products
Secondary metabolite
{{colend}}
Notes{{Reflist}}
References{{Reflist}}
Bibliography{{Commons}}

{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
N. B. Veselovskaya, AE Kovalenko Drugs, M.: Triada-X, 2000

{{alkaloids}}{{Link GA}}ar:??? ????
az:Alkaloidl?r
bn:???????
be:?????????
bg:????????
ca:Alcaloide
cs:Alkaloidy
da:Alkaloid
de:Alkaloide
et:Alkaloidid
el:??????????
es:Alcaloide
eo:Alkaloido
fa:?????????
fr:Alcaloïde
ga:Alcalóideach
gv:Alkaloyd
gl:Alcaloide
ko:?????
hy:???????????
hi:????????
hr:Alkaloid
io:Alkaloido
id:Alkaloid
it:Alcaloidi
he:????????
ka:???????????
kk:???????????
lv:Alkalo?di
lt:Alkaloidas
hu:Alkaloidok
mk:????????
nl:Alkaloïde
ja:??????
no:Alkaloid
nn:Alkaloid
oc:Alcaloïde
ps:???????
pl:Alkaloidy
pt:Alcaloide
ro:Alcaloid
ru:?????????
sq:Alkaloidet
simple:Alkaloid
sk:Alkaloid
sl:Alkaloid
sr:????????
sh:Alkaloid
su:Alkaloid
fi:Alkaloidi
sv:Alkaloid
tr:Alkaloid
uk:?????????
vi:Ancaloit
zh:???