title{{For}}

Allegory is a demonstrative form of representation explaining  meaning other than the words that are spoken. Allegory communicates its message by means of symbolic figures, actions or symbolic representation. Allegory is generally treated as a figure of rhetoric, but an allegory does not have to be expressed in language: briefly, an allegory is a device used to present an idea, principle or meaning, which can be presented in literary form, such as a poem or novel, or in visual form, such as in painting or drawing. As a literary device, an allegory in its most general sense is an extended metaphor. As an artistic device, an allegory is a visual symbolic representation. An example of a simple visual allegory is the image of the grim reaper. Viewers understand that the image of the grim reaper is a symbolic representation of death.
EtymologyFirst attested in English 1382, the word allegory comes from Latin allegoria, the latinisation of the Greek ????????? (allegoria), "veiled language, figurative",?????????, 
Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library  from ????? (allos), "another, different"?????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library + ??????? (agoreuo), "to harangue, to  speak in the assembly"???????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library and that from ????? (agora), "assembly".?????, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library
TypesNorthrop Frye discussed what he termed a "continuum of allegory," ranging from what he termed the "naive allegory" of The Faerie Queene, to the more private allegories of modern paradox literature. In this perspective, the characters in a "naive" allegory are not fully three-dimensional, for each aspect of their individual personalities and the events that befall them embodies some moral quality or other abstraction; the allegory has been selected first, and the details merely flesh it out.Many ancient religions are based on an astrologic allegories, that is, allegories of the movement of the Sun and the Moon as seen from the Earth. Examples include the cult of Horus/Isis.
The classical era
In classical literature two of the best-known allegories are the cave in Plato's Republic (Book VII) and the story of the stomach and its members in the speech of Menenius Agrippa (Livy ii. 32). In Late Antiquity Martianus Capella organized all the information a fifth-century upper-class male needed to know into an allegory of the wedding of Mercury and Philologia, with the seven liberal arts as guests; Capella's allegory was widely read through the Middle Ages.Other early allegories are found in the Hebrew Bible, for instance in the extended metaphor in Psalm 80 of the Vine, which is Israel{{cite book}} and Ezekiel 16 and 17.{{cite book}}
The medieval era{{Main}}
Medieval thinking accepted allegory as having a reality underlying any rhetorical or fictional uses. The allegory was as true as the facts of surface appearances. Thus, the bull Unam Sanctam (1302) presents themes of the unity of Christendom with the pope as its head in which the allegorical details of the metaphors are adduced as facts on which is based a demonstration with the vocabulary of logic: "Therefore of this one and only Church there is one body and one head—not two heads as if it were a monster... If, then, the Greeks or others say that they were not committed to the care of Peter and his successors, they necessarily confess that they are not of the sheep of Christ" (complete text).In the late 15th century, the enigmatic Hypnerotomachia, with its elaborate woodcut illustrations, shows the influence of themed pageants and masques on contemporary allegorical representation, as humanist dialectic conveyed them.The denial of medieval allegory as found in the 11th-century works of Hugh of St Victor and Edward Topsell's Historie of Foure-footed Beastes (London, 1607, 1653) and its replacement in the study of nature with methods of categorization and mathematics by such figures as naturalist John Ray and the astronomer Galileo is thought to mark the beginnings of early modern science.Peter Harrison, The Bible, Protestantism, and the rise of natural science, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-59196-1, pages 1 to 10 ("Introduction")
The modern era
Since meaningful stories are nearly always applicable to larger issues, allegories may be read into many stories, sometimes distorting their author's overt meaning. For instance, many people have suggested that The Lord of the Rings is an allegory for the World Wars, in spite of J. R. R. Tolkien's emphatic statement in the introduction to the second edition, "It is neither allegorical nor topical.... I cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations, and always have done so since I grew old and wary enough to detect its presence." 
Where some requirements of "realism", in its flexible meanings, are set aside, allegory can come more strongly to the surface, as in the work of Bertold Brecht on one hand, or on the other in science fiction and fantasy, where an element of universal application and allegorical overtones are common, as with The Chronicles of Narnia.
Examples by genreNot every resonant work of modern fiction is an allegory. Arthur Miller's The Crucible, for instance, is character-driven historical drama with contemporary relevance, but is not an allegory in spite of its parallels with McCarthyism, linking the hunt for communists in the 1940s and 1950s to the hunt for witches in the late 17th century. L. Frank Baum's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz is plot-driven fantasy narrative in an extended fable with talking animals and broadly-sketched characters. J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings is another example of a work sometimes seen as allegorical yet, as the author explained, is not - rather it is an example of what he referred to as applicability.
Art
Some elaborate and successful specimens of allegory are to be found in the following works, arranged in approximate chronological order:

Ambrogio Lorenzetti – &#34;Good Government in the City&#34; and &#34;Bad Government in the City&#34;
Sandro Botticelli – La Primavera (Allegory of Spring)
Albrecht Dürer – Melencolia I
Bronzino – Venus, Cupid, Folly, and Time
Artemisia Gentileschi – Self-Portrait as the Allegory of Painting; Allegory of Inclination
The English School's – "Allegory of Queen Elizabeth" painted circa 1610.
Jan Vermeer – The Allegory of Painting
Lady Justice.Lady Justice – Such visual representations have raised the question why so many allegories in the history of art, representing male gendered realities, are of female sex.Cäcilia Rentmeister: The Muses, Banned From Their Occupations: Why Are There So Many Allegories Female? english summary from Kvinnovetenskaplig Tidskrift, Nr.4. 1981, Lund, Sweden as PDF. Retrieved 10.July 2011 Original Version in German: Berufsverbot für die Musen. Warum sind so viele Allegorien weiblich? In: Ästhetik und Kommunikation, Nr.25/1976, S.92–112. Langfassung in: Frauen und Wissenschaft. Beiträge zur Berliner Sommeruniversität für Frauen, Juli 1976, Berlin 1977, S.258–297.  With illustrations. Full Texts Online: Cäcilia (Cillie) Rentmeister: publications
Graydon Parrish – The Cycle of Terror and Tragedy

<gallery perrow="3">
File:Titian - Allegorie der Zeit.jpg|Titian's Allegory of Age Governed by Prudence, with three human heads symbolising age and the triple-headed beast (dog, lion, wolf) standing for prudence.
File:Jan Vermeer van Delft 011.jpg|Jan Vermeer's work, The Allegory of Painting.
File:Elizabeth-I-Allegorical-Po.jpg|The English School's Allegory of Queen Elizabeth with Father Time at her right and Death looking over her left shoulder.  Two cherubs are removing the weighty crown from her tired head.
</gallery>
Literature

Classical literature



Aesop – Fables
Plato – The Republic (&#34;Plato's allegory of the cave&#34;)
Plato – Phaedrus (Chariot Allegory)
Euripides – The Trojan Women
Qu Yuan – Encountering Trouble
Book of Revelation (for allegory in Christian theology, see typology (theology)
Martianus Capella – De nuptiis philologiæ et Mercurii



Mediaeval literature



Prudentius – Psychomachia
Christine de Pizan – The Book of the City of Ladies
William Langland –  Piers Plowman
Pearl
Dante Alighieri – The Divine Comedy
Everyman



Modern literature
{{rquote}}

V for Vendetta, September 11 Attacks, the Holocaust, as well as the War on Terror
Edmund Spenser – The Faerie Queene
Edwin Abbott Abbott – Flatland
Joseph Addison – Vision of Mirza
Antoine De Saint-Exupery – The Little Prince
Jorge Luis Borges – &#34;The Library of Babel&#34; and &#34;The Babylon Lottery&#34;
Peter S. Beagle – The Last Unicorn
John Bunyan – Pilgrim's Progress
William M. Burwell – White Acre vs. Black Acre
Albert Camus – The Plague, The Stranger, and Myth of Sisyphus
Wu Cheng'en — The Journey to the West
J.M. Coetzee – Waiting for the Barbarians
Charles Dickens – A Christmas Carol
William Faulkner – A Rose for Emily (Emily symbolizes the decline of the Old South)
William Golding – Lord of the Flies
Daniel Handler – A Series of Unfortunate Events
Roger Hargreaves - Mr.Happy
Nathaniel Hawthorne – &#34;The Great Carbuncle&#34;, &#34;Young Goodman Brown&#34;
E. T. A. Hoffmann – Princess Brambilla
John Irving – A Prayer for Owen Meany
C.S. Lewis – The Chronicles of Narnia (most notably in the book The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe)
David Lindsay – A Voyage to Arcturus
Jack London- &#34;A Piece of Steak&#34;, short story about youth vs. old age
George MacDonald – Phantastes
Naguib Mahfouz – Children of Gebelawi
Bernard Malamud – The Natural
Cormac McCarthy – The Road
Herman Melville – The Confidence-Man
Hualing Nieh – Mulberry and Peach
George Orwell – Animal Farm
Edgar Allan Poe – &#34;The Masque of the Red Death&#34; (though Poe did not believe in allegory, this story is generally assumed to be one)Roppolo, Joseph Patrick. "Meaning and 'The Masque of the Red Death'", collected in Poe: A Collection of Critical Essays, edited by Robert Regan. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1967. p. 134
Theodore Francis Powys – Mr. Weston's Good Wine
Philip Pullman – His Dark Materials
Jose Saramago – Blindness
Anna Sewell – Black Beauty
John Steinbeck – Of Mice and Men
John Steinbeck –  The Pearl
Jonathan Swift – A Tale of a Tub and Gulliver's Travels (political allegory)
Koushun Takami – Battle Royale
Rex Warner – The Aerodrome
Mohsin Hamid – The Reluctant Fundamentalist



Plays



August Wilson – Fences (play) (Troy&#39;s fence is &#34;designed&#34; to keep the grim reaper away)


Film


James Cameron&#39;s Avatar, Native American Extermination for riches e.g. gold, mahogany, etc.
Fritz Lang&#39;s Metropolis
Ingmar Bergman&#39;s The Seventh Seal
El Topo
Star Trek: The Undiscovered Country, the Cold War
The Matrix
Dawn of the Dead
The Virgin Suicides
District 9, Apartheid
Gojira
Cannibal Holocaust, sensationalism
Foodland (film)
Ana's PlaygroundAna's Playground (2009)
The Wall (film)
Planet of the Apes (1968 film), racism, creationism, evolution, animal rights, anti-nuclear politics, McCarthyism, and socio-economic stratification.
Beneath the Planet of the Apes, Vietnam War, torture, Catholicism, jingoism, Mutual assured destruction.
The Dark Knight, The War on Terror
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1, The Holocaust
Pandorum, the degradation of the human condition in Works and Days and Paradise Lost. As well as The Divine Comedy


Television


The Last Night (varied themes)
Safa azmath luvs Athul all series, (varied themes, though frequently addressed the issues of prejudice and racism)
Star Trek: The Next Generation Season 5, Episode 2: Darmok
The Prisoner
Lost
Fringe


Comics

Various X-Men comics (mutants as an allegory for various social and racial minorities)
The manga Hanako and the Teller of Allegory calls a story given form from peoples&#39; belief in it an allegory
The end of every series Grant Morrison writes


See also{{Commons category}}

Allegory in the Middle Ages
Allegory in Renaissance literature
Allegorical sculpture
Cultural depictions of Philip II of Spain
Literary technique
Plot device
Roman à clef
Semiotics
Theagenes of Rhegium


References{{reflist}}
Further reading

Frye, Northrop (1957) Anatomy of Criticism.
Foucault, Michel (1966) The Order of Things.


External links

Brief definition of Allegory
Dictionary of the History of Ideas: Allegory in Literary history
Electronic Antiquity, Richard Levis, "Allegory and the Eclogues" Roman definitions of allegoria and interpreting Vergil&#39;s Eclogues.




ar:????? (???)
az:Alleqoriya
be:????????
bs:Alegorija
bg:????????
ca:Al·legoria
cs:Alegorie
da:Allegori
de:Allegorie
et:Allegooria
el:?????????
es:Alegoría
eo:Alegorio
fa:????? (??????)
fr:Allégorie
gl:Alegoría
ko:????
hr:Alegorija
io:Alegorio
id:Alegori
ia:Allegoria
is:Táknsaga
it:Allegoria
he:???????
ka:????????
kk:??????????
ku:Alegorî
lv:Alegorija
lt:Alegorija
hu:Allegória
mk:?????????
ml:??????????
nl:Allegorie (letterkunde)
ja:?????
no:Allegori
nn:Allegori
oc:Allegoria
uz:Allegoriya
pl:Alegoria
pt:Alegoria
ro:Alegorie
ru:?????????
sq:Alegoria
simple:Allegory
sk:Inotaj
sl:Alegorija
sr:?????????
sh:Alegorija
fi:Allegoria
sv:Allegori
th:???????????????
tr:Alegori
uk:????????
vi:Phúng d?
zh:??