title
Allotropy or allotropism is the property of some chemical elements to exist in two or more different forms, known as allotropes of these elements. Allotropes are different structural modifications of an element;Allotrope in IUPAC Compendium of Chemical Terminology, Electronic/ version, http://goldbook.iupac.org/A00243.html. Accessed March 2007. the atoms of the element are bonded together in a different manner.Take carbon for example: 4 common allotropes of carbon are diamond (where the carbon atoms are bonded together in a tetrahedral lattice arrangement), graphite (where the carbon atoms are bonded together in sheets of a hexagonal lattice), graphene (single sheets of graphite), and fullerenes (where the carbon atoms are bonded together in spherical, tubular, or ellipsoidal formations). The term allotropy is used for elements only, not for compounds. The more general term, used for any crystalline material, is polymorphism. Allotropy refers only to different forms of an element within the same phase (i.e. different solid, liquid or gas forms); the changes of state between solid, liquid and gas in themselves are not considered allotropy.For some elements, allotropes have different molecular formulae which can persist in different phases – for example, two allotropes of oxygen (dioxygen, O2 and ozone, O3), can both exist in the solid, liquid and gaseous states. Conversely, some elements do not maintain distinct allotropes in different phases – for example phosphorus has numerous solid allotropes, which all revert to the same P4 form when melted to the liquid state.
HistoryThe concept of allotropy was originally proposed in 1841 by the Swedish scientist Baron Jöns Jakob Berzelius (1779–1848) who offered no explanation.{{citation}}. The term is derived from the Greek {{Polytonic}} (allotropia; variability, changeableness).{{Citation}}. After the acceptance of Avogadro's hypothesis in 1860 it was understood that elements could exist as polyatomic molecules, and the two allotropes of oxygen were recognized as O2 and O3. In the early 20th century it was recognized that other cases such as carbon were due to differences in crystal structure.By 1912, Ostwald noted that the allotropy of elements is just a special case of the phenomenon of polymorphism known for compounds, and proposed that the terms allotrope and allotropy be abandoned and replaced by polymorph and polymorphism. Although many other chemists have repeated this advice, IUPAC and most chemistry texts still favour the usage of allotrope and allotropy for elements only.
Differences in properties of an element's allotropesAllotropes are different structural forms of the same element and can exhibit quite different physical properties and chemical behaviours.  The change between allotropic forms is triggered by the same forces that affect other structures, i.e. pressure, light, and temperature.  Therefore the stability of the particular allotropes depends on particular conditions. For instance, iron  changes from a body-centered cubic structure (ferrite) to a face-centered cubic structure (austenite) above 906 °C, and tin undergoes a transformation known as tin pest from a metallic phase to a semiconductor phase below 13.2 °C. As an example of different chemical behaviour, ozone (O3) is a much stronger oxidizing agent than dioxygen (O2).
List of allotropes{{Expand section}}Typically, elements capable of variable coordination number and/or oxidation states tend to exhibit greater numbers of allotropic forms.  Another contributing factor is the ability of an element to catenate.  Allotropes are typically more noticeable in non-metals (excluding the halogens and the noble gases) and metalloids. Nevertheless, metals tend to have many allotropes.Examples of allotropes include:
Non-metals

Element Allotropes 
Carbon 

Diamond - an extremely hard, transparent crystal, with the carbon atoms arranged in a tetrahedral lattice. A poor electrical conductor. An excellent thermal conductor.
Lonsdaleite - also called hexagonal diamond.
Graphite - a soft, black, flaky solid, a moderate electrical conductor. The C atoms are bonded in flat hexagonal lattices (graphene), which are then layered in sheets.
Linear acetylenic carbon (Carbyne)
Amorphous carbon
Fullerenes, including Buckminsterfullerene, aka &#34;buckyballs&#34;, such as C60.
Carbon nanotubes - allotropes of carbon with a cylindrical nanostructure.
 
Phosphorus: 

White phosphorus - crystalline solid {{chem}}
Red phosphorus - polymeric solid
Scarlet phosphorus
Violet phosphorus
Black phosphorus - semiconductor, analogous to graphite
Diphosphorus
 
Oxygen: 

dioxygen, O2 - colorless (faint blue)
Ozone, O3 - blue
Tetraoxygen, O4 - metastable
Octaoxygen, {{chem}} - red
 
Sulfur: 

Plastic (amorphous) sulfur - polymeric solid
Rhombic sulfur - large crystals composed of S8 molecules
Monoclinic sulfur - fine needle-like crystals
Other ring molecules such as S7 and  S12
 
Selenium: 

&#34;Red selenium,&#34; cyclo-Se8
Gray selenium, polymeric Se
Black selenium
 

Metalloids

Element Allotropes 
Boron: 

Amorphous boron - brown powder
?-rhombohedral boron
?-rhombohedral boron
?-boron
Tetragonal boron phases
High-pressure superconducting phase
 
Silicon: 

Amorphous silicon - brown powder
Polycrystalline silicon - has a metallic luster and a grayish color. Single crystals of crystalline silicon can be grown with a process known as the Czochralski process
Monocrystalline silicon
 
Arsenic: 

Yellow arsenic -  molecular non-metallic As4
Gray arsenic, polymeric As (metalloid)
Black arsenic (metalloid) and several similar other ones.
 
Germanium 

?-germanium -
?-germanium - at high pressures
 
Antimony 

blue-white antimony - the stable form (metalloid)
yellow antimony (non-metallic)
black antimony (non-metallic)
&#39;Explosive&#39;
 

Metals
Among the naturally occurring metallic elements (up to U, without Tc and Pm), 28 are allotropic at ambient pressure: Li, Be, Na, Ca, Sr, Ti, Mn, Fe, Co, Sr, Y, Zr, Sn, La, Ce, Pr, Nd, (Pm), Sm, Gd, Tb, Dy, Yb, Hf, Tl, Po, Th, Pa, U.
Considering only the technologically-relevant metals,{{Clarify}} six metals are allotropic: Ti at 882?C, Fe at 912?C and 1394?C, Co at 422?C, Zr at 863?C, Sn at 13?C and U at 668?C and 776?C.

Element Allotropes 
Tin 

grey tin (alpha-tin)
white tin (beta tin)
rhombic tin (gamma)
 
Iron 

ferrite (alpha iron) - forms below 770°C (the Curie point, TC); the iron becomes magnetic in its alpha form; BCC
beta - forms below 912°C (BCC)
gamma - forms below 1,394°C; face centred cubic (FCC) crystal structure
delta - forms from cooling down molten iron below 1,538°C; has a body-centred cubic (BCC) crystal structure
 

Lanthanides and actinides


Cerium, samarium, terbium, dysprosium and ytterbium have three allotropes.



Praseodymium, neodymium, gadolinium  and terbium have two allotropes.



Plutonium has six distinct solid allotropes under &#34;normal&#34; pressures.  Their densities vary within a ratio of some 4:3, which vastly complicates all kinds of work with the metal (particularly casting, machining, and storage).  A seventh plutonium allotrope exists at very high pressures.  The transuranium metals Np, Am, and Cm are also allotropic.



Promethium, americium, berkelium, californium have 3 allotropes http://www.iop.org/EJ/article/0305-4608/15/2/002/jfv15i2pL29.pdf?request-id=AFlRqDDL3BGhbarg2wi7Kg


See also

Superdense carbon allotropes?

References{{Reflist}}
{{Cite EB1911}}
External links

http://www.physics.uoguelph.ca/summer/scor/articles/scor40.htm{{dead link}}
Allotropes - Chemistry Encyclopedia


ar:????
be:?????????
bs:Alotropske modifikacije
bg:?????????
ca:Al·lotropia
cs:Alotropie
cy:Alotrop
da:Allotropi
de:Allotropie
et:Allotroopia
el:?????????
es:Alotropía
eo:Alotropo
eu:Alotropia
fa:???????
fr:Allotropie
ga:Allatrópacht
gl:Alotropía
ko:???
hy:??????????????
hi:???????
hr:Alotropija
id:Alotrop
is:Fjölgervi
it:Allotropia (chimica)
he:?????????
kn:???????????
ka:?????????
kk:??????????
ht:Alotwopi
ku:Alotrop
lv:Alotropija
lt:Alotropija
li:Allotropie
hu:Allotrópia
ml:????????????
ms:Alotrop
mn:?????????
nl:Allotropie
ja:???
no:Allotropi
nn:Allotrope former
pl:Alotropia
pt:Alotropia
ro:Alotropie
ru:??????????
simple:Allotrope
sk:Alotropia
sl:Alotropija
sr:Alotropska modifikacija
sh:Alotropska modifikacija
fi:Allotropia
sv:Allotropi
th:??????
tr:Allotrop
uk:?????????
vi:Thù hình
zh:?????