title{{Redirect}}
{{Infobox organization}}
The American National Standards Institute (ANSI, {{IPAc-en}} {{respell}}) is a private non-profit organization that oversees the development of voluntary consensus standards for products, services, processes, systems, and personnel in the United States. The organization also coordinates U.S. standards with international standards so that American products can be used worldwide.  For example, standards ensure that people who own cameras can find the film they need for that camera anywhere around the globe. ANSI accredits standards that are developed by representatives of standards developing organizations, government agencies, consumer groups, companies, and others. These standards ensure that the characteristics and performance of products are consistent, that people use the same definitions and terms, and that products are tested the same way. ANSI also accredits organizations that carry out product or personnel certification in accordance with requirements defined in international standards.ANSI 2009 Annual ReportThe organization's headquarters are in Washington, DC. ANSI's operations office is located in New York City. The ANSI annual operating budget is funded by the sale of publications, membership dues and fees, accreditation services, fee-based programs, and international standards programs.
HistoryANSI was originally formed in 1918, when five engineering societies and three government agencies founded the American Engineering Standards Committee (AESC). In 1928, the AESC became the American Standards Association (ASA). In 1966, the ASA was reorganized and became the United States of America Standards Institute (USASI). The present name was adopted in 1969.Prior to 1918, these five founding engineering societies:

American Institute of Electrical Engineers (AIEE, now IEEE)
American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE)
American Institute of Mining Engineers (AIME, now American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical, and Petroleum Engineers)
American Society for Testing and Materials (now ASTM International)
had been members of the United Engineering Society (UES).
At the behest of the AIEE, they invited the U.S. government Departments of War, Navy (combined in 1947 to become the Department of Defense or DOD) and CommerceANSI history- Retrieved 2011-09-27 to join in founding a national standards organization.According to Paul G. Agnew, the first permanent secretary and head of staff in 1919, AESC started as an ambitious program and little else.  Staff for the first year consisted of one executive, Clifford B. LePage, who was on loan from a founding member, ASME.  An annual budget of $7,500 was provided by the founding bodies.In 1931, the organization (renamed ASA in 1928) became affiliated with the U.S. National Committee of the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), which had been formed in 1904 to develop electrical and electronics standards.http://www.iec.ch/
MembersANSI's membership comprises government agencies, organizations, corporations, academic and international bodies, and individuals. In total, the Institute represents the interests of more than 125,000 companies and 3.5 million professionals.ANSI membership page, www.ansi.org/membership
ProcessThough ANSI itself does not develop standards, the Institute oversees the development and use of standards by accrediting the procedures of standards developing organizations. ANSI accreditation signifies that the procedures used by standards developing organizations meet the Institute's requirements for openness, balance, consensus, and due process.ANSI also designates specific standards as American National Standards, or ANS, when the Institute determines that the standards were developed in an environment that is equitable, accessible and responsive to the requirements of various stakeholders.Value of the ANS Designation brochureVoluntary consensus standards quicken the market acceptance of products while making clear how to improve the safety of those products for the protection of consumers. There are approximately 9,500 American National Standards that carry the ANSI designation.The American National Standards process involves:

consensus by a group that is open to representatives from all interested parties
broad-based public review and comment on draft standards
consideration of and response to comments
incorporation of submitted changes that meet the same consensus requirements into a draft standard
availability of an appeal by any participant alleging that these principles were not respected during the standards-development process.


International activitiesIn addition to facilitating the formation of standards in the U.S., ANSI promotes the use of U.S. standards internationally, advocates U.S. policy and technical positions in international and regional standards organizations, and encourages the adoption of international standards as national standards where appropriate.The Institute is the official U.S. representative to the two major international standards organizations, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), as a founding memberISO founding member- Retrieved 2011-09-27, and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), via the U.S. National Committee (USNC). ANSI participates in almost the entire technical program of both the ISO and the IEC, and administers many key committees and subgroups. In many instances, U.S. standards are taken forward to ISO and IEC, through ANSI or the USNC, where they are adopted in whole or in part as international standards.
Standards panelsThe Institute administers five standards panels:

The ANSI Biofuels Standards Panel (ANSI-BSP)
The Healthcare Information Technology Standards Panel
The ANSI Homeland Security Standards Panel
The ANSI Nanotechnology Standards Panel
The Identity Theft Prevention and Identity Management Standards Panel

Each of the panels works to identify, coordinate, and harmonize voluntary standards relevant to these areas. In 2009, ANSI and the National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) formed the Nuclear Energy Standards Coordination Collaborative (NESCC). NESCC is a joint initiative to identify and respond to the current need for standards in the nuclear industry. 
American national standards

The ASA (as for American Standards Association) photographic exposure system, originally defined in ASA Z38.2.1 (since 1943) and ASA PH2.5 (since 1954), together with the DIN system (DIN 4512 since 1934), became the basis for the ISO system (since 1974), currently used worldwide (ISO 6, ISO 2240, ISO 5800, ISO 12232).
A standard for the set of values used to represent characters in digital computers.  The ANSI code standard extended the previously created ASCII seven bit code standard (ASA X3.4-1963), with additional codes for European alphabets (see also Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code or EBCDIC).  In Microsoft Windows, the phrase &#34;ANSI&#34; refers to the Windows ANSI code pages (even though they are not ANSI standards).Microsoft Glossary Most of these are fixed width, though some characters for ideographic languages are variable width. Since these characters are based on a draft of the ISO-8859 series, some of Microsoft&#39;s symbols are visually very similar to the ISO symbols, leading many to falsely assume that they are identical.
The first computer programming language standard was &#34;American Standard Fortran&#34; (informally known as &#34;FORTRAN 66&#34;), approved in March 1966 and published as ASA X3.9-1966.
The original standard implementation of the programming language C was standardized as ANSI X3.159-1989, becoming the well-known ANSI C.
The ANSI-NSF International standards used for commercial kitchens, such as restaurants, cafeterias, delis, etc.
The ANSI/APSP (Association of Pool &#38; Spa Professionals) standards used for pools, spas, hot tubs, barriers, and suction entrapment avoidance.
The ANSI/HI (Hydraulic Institute) standards used for pumps.
The ANSI for eye protection is Z87.1, which gives a specific impact resistance rating to the eyewear. This standard is commonly used for shop glasses, shooting glasses, and many other examples of protective eyewear.
The ANSI paper sizes (ANSI/ASME Y14.1).


Other initiatives

In 2008 ANSI, in  partnershiphttp://www.citationtechnologies.com/alliances/ansi with Citation Technologies, created the first dynamic, online web library for ISO 14000 standards.ANSI ISO 14000 Press Release
On June 23, 2009 ANSI announced a product and services agreement with Citation Technologies to deliver all ISO Standards on a web-based platform. Through the ANSI-Citation partnership, 17,765 International Standards developed by more than 3,000 ISO technical bodies will be made available on the citation platform, arming subscribers with powerful search tools and collaboration, notification, and change-management functionality.ANSI Press Release 07.23.09
ANSI, in partnership with Citation Technologies, AAMI, ASTM, and DIN, created a single, centralized database for medical device standards on September 9, 2009.Medical Device Standards Database Press Release 09/09/09
In early 2009, ANSI launched a new Certificate Accreditation Program (ANSI-CAP) to provide neutral, third-party attestation that a given certificate program meets the American National Standard ASTM E2659-09.
In 2009, ANSI began accepting applications for certification bodies seeking accreditation according to requirements defined under the Toy Safety Certification Program (TSCP) as the official third-party accreditor of TSCP’s product certification bodies.
In 2006, ANSI launched www.StandardsPortal.org, an online resource for facilitating more open and efficient trade between international markets in the areas of standards, conformity assessment, and technical regulations. The site currently features content for China, India, and Korea, with additional countries and regions planned for future content.


See also

ASCII
Fortran
ANSI C
ANSI ASC X9
ANSI ASC X12
ANSI escape code
ANSI-SPARC Architecture
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
Institute of Nuclear Materials Management (INMM)
Institute of Environmental Sciences and Technology (IEST)
Accredited Crane Operator Certification
Open standards


References{{Reflist}}
External links

American National Standards Institute official Web site
ANSI eStandardsStore
ANSI Overview
ANSI Historical Overview
Historical Overview Brochure
ANSI iPackages Portals & WebStore - ISO14000 online portals
Documents of Interest:
ANSI Essential Requirements: Due process requirements for American National Standards
ANSI Critical Issue Paper: Current Attempts to Change Established Definition of “Open” Standards
ANSI code list at Piping-Designer.com





ar:?????? ?????? ???????? ???????
zh-min-nan:ANSI
bs:ANSI
br:ANSI
cs:American National Standards Institute
da:American National Standards Institute
de:American National Standards Institute
et:ANSI
es:Instituto Nacional Estadounidense de Estándares
fa:????? ??? ????????? ??????
fr:American National Standards Institute
ga:ANSI
gl:American National Standards Institute
hr:ANSI
ko:ANSI
it:American National Standards Institute
he:???? ?????? ????????
lv:ANSI
lb:American National Standards Institute
hu:ANSI
ms:American National Standards Institute
nl:American National Standards Institute
ja:ANSI
no:American National Standards Institute
nn:American National Standards Institute
pl:American National Standards Institute
pt:American National Standards Institute
ru:???????????? ???????????? ???????? ??????????
sk:American National Standards Institute
sl:ANSI
sr:???????? ?????????? ????? ?? ???????????????
fi:American National Standards Institute
sv:ANSI
th:????????????????????????????????????
tr:ANSI
uk:????????????? ???????????? ???????? ??????????
vi:ANSI
zh:????????