titleThe meaning of the word American in the English language varies, according to the historical, geographical, and political context in which it is used. It is derived from America, a term originally denoting all of the New World (today also called "the Americas"). In some expressions it retains this Pan-American sense, but its usage has evolved over time and, for various historical reasons, the word came to denote people or things specifically from the United States of America. In modern English, "American" generally refers to the United States, and in the U.S. itself this usage is almost universal, with any other use of the term requiring specification of the subject under discussion.Wilson, Kenneth G. (1993). The Columbia Guide to Standard American English New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 27–28. ISBN 0-231-06989-8.{{cite journal}}Walter S. Avis, Patrick D. Drysdale, Robert J. Gregg, Victoria E. Eeufeldt, Mattheew H. Scargill (1983). Gage Canadian Dictionary. Toronto: Gage Publishing Limited, p. 37. ISBN 0-7715-9122-5 pbk.The word can be used as both a noun and an adjective in english spoken countries. In adjectival use, it is generally understood to mean "of or relating to the United States"; for example, "Elvis Presley was an American singer" or "the American President gave a speech today." In noun form, it generally means U.S. citizen or national (see Names for U.S. citizens). The noun is rarely used in American English to refer to people not connected to the United States. When used with a grammatical qualifier, the adjective American can mean "of or relating to the Americas," as in Latin American or Indigenous American. Less frequently, the adjective can take this meaning without a qualifier, as in "American Spanish dialects and pronunciation differ by country", or the name of the Organization of American States. A third use of the term pertains specifically to the indigenous peoples of the Americas, for instance, "In the 16th century, many Americans died from imported diseases during the European conquest".
Other languagesThe French, Portuguese, German, and Italian languages use cognates of the word "American", in denoting "U.S. citizen". In Spanish, americano denotes geographic and cultural origin in the New World, as well as infrequently a U.S. citizen;Diccionario de la lengua española de la Real Academia Española, http://buscon.rae.es/draeI/SrvltGUIBusUsual?TIPO_HTML=2&TIPO_BUS=3&LEMA=americano the adjective and noun, denoting estadounidense (United States person), derives from Estados Unidos de América (United States of America). Such usage is slightly more descriptive than "American". The Spanish term norteamericano (North American), is frequently used to refer things and persons from the United States, but this usage is not accurate, because the term can also denote things and persons from Canada, Mexico, Greenland, Bermuda and St Pierre and Miquelon.Diccionario de la lengua española de la Real Academia Española, norteamericano
The Spanish words estadounidense (United States person), yanqui (Yankee), and gringo are Mexican, Central American, Caribbean, South American and European Spanish usages denoting U.S. things and persons. In personal denotation, "gringo" means estadounidense, in particular, and anglophones in general, and, linguistically, any speech not Spanish, i.e. "She is speaking gringo, not Spanish".Diccionario de la lengua española de la Real Academia Española, gringo, second aception: "said of a language: foreign". Cognate usages may cause cultural friction between U.S. nationals and Latin Americans who object to American English's exclusionary denotations of American.Portuguese has americano, denoting both a person or thing from the Americas and a U.S. national.Dicionário Priberam da Língua Portuguesa, http://www.priberam.pt/dlpo/default.aspx?pal=americano For referring specifically to a U.S. national and things, the words used are estadunidense (also spelled estado-unidense) (United States person), from Estados Unidos da América, and ianque (Yankee), but the term most often used is norte-americano, even though it could, as with its Spanish equivalent, in theory apply to Canadians, Mexicans, etc., as well. In French, étasunien,{{Citation needed}} from États-Unis d'Amérique, distinguishes U.S. things and persons from the adjective américain, which denotes persons and things from the United States but may also refer to the Americas; likewise, the German usages U.S.-amerikanisch and U.S.-Amerikaner{{Citation needed}} observe said cultural distinction, solely denoting U.S. things and people. It is important to note that these are "politically correct" terms and that in normal parlance, the adjective "American" and its direct cognates are almost always used unless the context does not render the nationality of the person clear. For example, the word "Amerika" in German has a one-to-one equivalence to its meaning in modern English: it may denote North America, South America, or both, and in some instances refers to the United States.Chinese has {{zh}} in which the first element sounds like the accented second syllable in "America" (and the second element means "nation").
History of the wordThe derivation of America has several explanatory naming theories. The most common is Martin Waldseemüller's deriving it from Americus Vespucius, the Latinised version of Amerigo Vespucci's name, the Italian merchant and cartographer who explored South America's east coast and the Caribbean sea in the early 16th century. Later, his published letters were the basis of Waldseemüller's 1507 map, which is the first usage of America. (See {{cite web}} {{Dead link}})In 1886, Jules Marcou said Vespucci renamed himself from Alberigo Vespucci (Albericus Vespucius) to Amerigo Vespucci after meeting the native inhabitants of the eponymous Amerrique mountain ranges of Nicaragua{{Citation needed}} that connect North America and South America, an important geographic feature of New World maps and charts. Moreover, there is the 1908 theory that America derives from Richard Amerike of Bristol, England, financier of John Cabot's 1497 expedition. Cabot is believed the first Western European on the mainland{{Citation needed}}. In the event, the adjective American subsequently denotes the New World's peoples and things.16th-century European usage of American denoted the native inhabitants of the New World."American". From the Oxford English Dictionary. Retrieved November 27, 2008. The earliest recorded use of this term in English is in Thomas Hacket's 1568 translation of André Thévet's book on France Antarctique; Thévet himself had referred to the natives as Ameriques. In the following century the term was extended to European settlers and their descendants in the Americas. The earliest recorded use of this term in English dates to 1648, in Thomas Gage's The English-American: A New Survet of the West Indies. In English, "American" was used especially for people in the British America, and came to be applied to citizens of the United States when the country was formed. The Declaration of Independence refers to "[the] unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States of America" adopted by the "Representatives of the united States of America" on July 4, 1776.{{cite web}} The official name of the country was established on November 15, 1777, when the Second Continental Congress adopted the Articles of Confederation, the first of which says, "The Stile of this Confederacy shall be 'The United States of America' ". The confederation articles further state: "In Witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands in Congress. Done at Philadelphia in the State of Pennsylvania the ninth day of July in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Seventy-Eight, and in the Third Year of the independence of America." Common short forms and abbreviations are the United States, the U.S., the U.S.A., and America. Colloquial versions are the U.S. of A. and the States. The term Columbia (from the Columbus surname), was a popular name for the U.S. and for the entire geographic Americas; its usage is restricted to the District of Columbia name. Moreover, the womanly personification of Columbia appears in some official documents, including editions of the U.S. dollar.In the Federalist Papers, Alexander Hamilton and James Madison use American with two different meanings, political and geographic; "the American republic" in Federalist Paper 51 and in Federalist Paper 70,{{cite web}}{{cite web}} and, in Federalist Paper 24, Hamilton's American usage denotes the lands beyond the U.S.'s political borders:{{cite journal}}{{quotation}}United States President George Washington's farewell in 1796 says: "The name of American, which belongs to you in your national capacity, must always exalt the just pride of patriotism more than any appellation.""Washington's Farewell Address 1796". From The Avalon Project. Retrieved November 10, 2008.Originally, the name "the United States" was plural—"the United States are"—a usage found in the U.S. Constitution's Thirteenth Amendment (1865), but its current common usage is singular—"the United States is". The plural is set in the idiom "these United States".{{cite web}}Before the Constitutional Convention, several country names were proffered, the most popular being "Columbia". The problems of "the United States of America" as a name (long, awkward, imprecise) were discussed; the Constitution ignores the matter, using "the United States of America" and "the United States". The name "Colombia" (derived from Christopher Columbus; Sp: Cristóbal Colón, It: Cristoforo Colombo), was proposed by the revolutionary Francisco de Miranda to denote the New World—especially Spain's and Portugal's American territories and colonies; it was used in the country names Republic of Columbia and the United States of Colombia.Early official U.S. documents betray inconsistent usage; the 1778 Treaty of Alliance with France uses "the United States of North America" in the first sentence, then uses "the said United States" afterwards; "the United States of America" and "the United States of North America" derive from "the United Colonies of America" and "the United Colonies of North America". The Treaty of Peace and Amity of September 5, 1795 between the United States and the Barbary States contains the usages "the United States of North America", "citizens of the United States", and "American Citizens".{{cite web}}Semantic divergence among Anglophones did not affect the Spanish colonies. In 1801, the document titled Letter to American Spaniards—published in French (1799), in Spanish (1801), and in English (1808)—might have influenced Venezuela's Act of Independence and its 1811 constitution.{{cite web}} {{es icon}}The Latter-day Saints' Articles of Faith refer to the American continent as where they are to build Zion.Articles of Faith 1 The Old Catholic Encyclopedia's usage of America is as "the Western Continent or the New World". It discusses American republics, ranging from the U.S. to "the republic of Mexico, the Central American republics of Guatemala, Honduras, San Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Leon, and Panama; the Antillian republics of Haiti, Santo Domingo, and Cuba, and the South American republics of Venezuela, Colombia, Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Paraguay, the Argentine, and Chile".Catholic Encyclopedia: America
Usage at the United NationsUse of the term American for U.S. nationals is common in United Nations. The Secretary General refers to people from the United States as Americans, as has the UN High Commissioner for Refugees.http://www.un.org/apps/news/story.asp?NewsID=30715&Cr=appointment&Cr1=experiencehttp://www.un.org/works/sub3.asp?lang=en&id=123 The UN has referred to financial markets in the United States as "American financial markets."http://www.un.org/News/briefings/docs/2009/090326_GA.doc.htmAmerican Samoa is a recognized territorial name at the United Nations."American Samoa". United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
Population Division. Retrieved August 6, 2009.
Political and cultural views
Spain and Hispanic AmericaThe use of American as a national demonym for U.S. nationals is challenged, primarily by Latin Americans. Many Spanish speakers in Latin America use the term estadounidenseReal Academia Española, Diccionario de la lengua española, 2001, estadounidense ("United-Statesian") rather than americano. The dictionary of Real Academia Española in 1992 did not include the alternative from the United States as one of the meanings of americano.Real Academia Española, Diccionario usual, 1992, p. 89. Available beginning from http://buscon.rae.es/ntlle/SrvltGUILoginNtlle and using the magnifying glass icon.Real Academia Española, Diccionario de la lengua española, 2001, americano, fourth edition (not present in 1992) defines americano as estadounidense.The Diccionario de la Lengua Española (Dictionary of the Spanish Language) published by the Real Academia Española (Royal Spanish Academy), defines estadounidense (United Statesian) as "someone or something from or relating to the United States", the common Spanish usage for U.S. people and things. People originating from, or who have lived in, the Western Hemisphere might be called americanos.Real Academia Española, Diccionario de la lengua española, 2001, americano, first edition defines americano as from América (the continent).Moreover, the Royal Spanish Academy advises against using americanos exclusively for U.S. nationals:Diccionario panhispánico de dudas, Estados Unidos{{quotation}}English translation:{{quotation}}
CanadaPrior to Confederation in 1867, the word "Canadian" referred only to residents of the colony of Canada, which consisted of the territory of modern Quebec and Ontario. The term did not apply to residents of the colonies of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island or Newfoundland. Collectively, the British colonies were known as British North America, and their residents referred to themselves as "British Americans." Since the War of 1812, the term "American" acquired a pejorative context within Canada.{{Citation needed}} Even since the BNA Act of 1867, which defines the word Canada in its modern context, the pejorative context of the term "American" remains widespread.Modern Canadians typically refer to people from the United States as "Americans", though they seldom refer to the United States as "America", using the terms "the United States", "the U.S.", or (informally) "the States" instead.Fee, Margery and McAlpine, J. 1997. Oxford Guide to Canadian English Usage. (ISBN 0-19-541619-8) Toronto: Oxford University Press; p. 36. Canadians rarely apply the term "American" to themselves – some Canadians resent being referred to as Americans because of mistaken assumptions that they are U.S. citizens or an inability, particularly of people overseas, to distinguish Canadian English and American English accents. Some Canadians have protested the use of American as a national demonym.{{cite journal}} People of U.S. ethnic origin in Canada are categorized as "American (U.S.)" by Statistics Canada for purposes of census counts.97F0010XCB2001001
Portugal and BrazilGenerally, americano denotes "U.S. citizen" in Portugal. Usage of americano to exclusively denote people and things of the U.S. is discouraged by the Academia das Ciências de Lisboa (Lisbon Academy of Sciences), because the specific word estado-unidense (also estadunidense) clearly denotes a person from the United States. The term currently used by the Portuguese press is norte-americano.In Brazil, the term americano (American) is used to address both that which pertains to the American continent and, in current speech, that which pertains to the U.S.A. (the particular meaning is deduced from context). Alternatively the term "norte-americano" (North American) is also used in more informal contexts while "estadunidense" (U.S. citizen or thing) is the preferred form in academia. Use of the three terms is common in schools, government and media. The term "América" (America) on the other hand is used almost exclusively for the continent as the U.S.A. are called "Estados Unidos" (United States) or "Estados Unidos da América" (United States of America), often abbreviated to "EUA" (USA).The Getting Through Customs website advises business travellers not to use "in America" as a U.S. reference when conducting business in Brazil.{{cite web}}
United States
The United States Census Bureau reports 7.3 percent of U.S. residents to be of "United States or American" ancestryUnited States - QT-P13. Ancestry: 2000 based on responses to the 2000 Census long-form questionnaire (1 in 6 sample). Discrete responses of United States and American or an ambiguous response or a state-name response (excluding Hawaii) were aggregated as "United States or American". Distinct racial, ethnic, and cultural groups such as "American Indian", "Mexican American", "African American", and "Hawaiian" were coded separately.The word "American" appears in the name of the U.S. territory of American Samoa. American Samoa began using the word American in its title when it became a U.S. territory.
American in other contextsAmerican in the Associated Press Stylebook (1994) is defined as: "An acceptable description for a resident of the United States. It also may be applied to any resident or citizen of nations in North or South America". Elsewhere, the AP Stylebook indicates that "United States" must "be spelled out when used as a noun. Use U.S. (no space) only as an adjective".The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage (1999) America entry reads: the "terms America, American(s) and Americas refer not only to the United States, but to all of North America and South America. They may be used in any of their senses, including references to just the United States, if the context is clear. The countries of the Western Hemisphere are collectively the Americas ".Media releases from the Pope and Holy See frequently use America to refer to the United States, and American to denote something or someone from the United States.http://www.vatican.va/http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/paul_vi/homilies/1965/documents/hf_p-vi_hom_19651004_yankee-stadium_en.html
American in international lawAt least one international law uses "U.S. citizen" in defining a citizen of the United States rather than American citizen such as this excerpt from the North American Free Trade Agreement:{{quotation}}Many other international treaties use the term American and American citizen. The Thailand Treaty of Amity protects Americans and American companies.http://www.buyusa.gov/thailand/en/treatyofamity.html The Treaty between the United States and the Dey of the Regency of Algiers on March 7, 1796 protected American citizens.http://www.pbs.org/georgewashington/collection/pres_1796mar7.html The Louisiana Purchase Treaty between France and United States referred to American citizens.http://www.pbs.org/weta/thewest/resources/archives/one/louispur.htm The 1858 Treaty of Amity and Commerce between the United States and Japan protected American citizens and also used the term American.http://web.jjay.cuny.edu/~jobrien/reference/ob58.html The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo between Mexico and the U.S. uses the term American Government to refer to the United States, and American tribunals to refer to U.S. courts.http://www.laprensa-sandiego.org/archieve/september21/treaty.htm The 1825 treaty between the United States and the Cheyenne tribe refers to American citizen.http://www.firstpeople.us/FP-Html-Treaties/TreatyWithTheCheyenneTribe1825.html The Treaty of Paris ending the Spanish-American War, known as Guerra Hispano-Estadounidense in Spanish, uses the word American in reference to United States troops.http://avalon.law.yale.edu/19th_century/sp1898.asp
American in U.S. commercial regulationProducts that are labelled, advertised, and marketed in the U.S. as "American Made" must be "all or virtually all made in the U.S." The Federal Trade Commission, to prevent deception of customers and unfair competition, considers an unqualified claim of "American Made" to expressly claim exclusive manufacture in the U.S. "The FTC Act gives the Commission the power to bring law enforcement actions against false or misleading claims that a product is of U.S. origin."Complying with the Made In the USA Standard
U.S. national in other languagesEnglish, French, German, Italian, Japanese,Japanese: ????? amerika-jin Hebrew, Arabic, Portuguese, and Russian{{lang-ru}} speakers may use the term American to refer to either inhabitants of the Americas or to U.S. nationals. They generally have other terms specific to U.S. nationals, such as German US-Amerikaner, French étatsunien, Japanese ??? beikokujin, Arabic ???????? amriikaanii (as opposed to the more-common ?????? amriikii), and Italian statunitense, but these may be less common than the term American. Adjectives derived from "United States" (such as United Statesian) are awkward in English, but similar constructions exist in Spanish (estadounidense), Portuguese (estado-unidense, estadunidense), Finnish (yhdysvaltalainen: from Yhdysvallat, United States), as well as in French (états-unien), and Italian (statunitense).In Spanish, at least one reference reports estadounidense, estado-unidense or estadunidense are preferred to americano for U.S. nationals; the latter tends to refer to any resident of the Americas and not necessarily from the United States.{{cite book}} In Portuguese, estado-unidense(or estadunidense) is the recommended form by language regulators but today it is less frequently used than americano and norte-americano.
Latin Americans also may employ the term norteamericano (North American), which conflates the United States, Canada and Mexico."norteamericano" Real Academia Española. 2005. Diccionario panhispánico de dudas. Madrid: Santillana. (in Spanish)With the 1994 passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement, the following words were used to label the United States Section of that organization: in French, étatsunien; in Spanish, estadounidense. In English the adjective used to indicate relation to the United States is U.S.{{Citation needed}}The word Gringo is widely used in parts of Latin America in reference to U.S. residents, often in a pejorative way but not necessarily. Yanqui (Yankee) is also very common in some regions, but it is usually pejorative. Throughout Latin America the word Gringo is also used for any foreigner from the United States, Canada, or Europe, however the true sense of the word is any foreigner.{{Citation needed}}In other languages, however, there is no possibility for confusion. Chinese m?iguórénStandard Mandarin pronunciation; written ??? (traditional), ??? (simplified) for example, is derived from a word for the United States, m?iguó, where m?i is an abbreviation for Yàm?ilìji? "America" and guó is "country". The name for the continent of America is m?izh?u,?? from m?i plus zh?u "continent". Thus a m?izh?urén is an American in the generic sense, and a m?iguórén is an American in the U.S. sense. Similar words are found in Korean??(?) Migug(in) vs. ????(?) Amerika(in) and Vietnamese.(ng??i) Hoa K? ?? vs. (ng??i) Châu M? ??; the term for the U.S. is taken from its flag.Japanese has such terms as well, ??(?) beikoku(jin) vs. ??? beish?(jin), but they are found more in newspaper headlines than in speech, where amerikajin predominates. In Swahili, the more naturalized word Marekani means specifically the United States, and Wamarekani are U.S. nationals, whereas the international form Amerika refers to the continent, and Waamerika are the inhabitants thereof. Likewise, the Esperanto word Ameriko refers only to the continent. For the country there is the term Usono, cognate with the English word Usonia later popularized by Frank Lloyd Wright. Thus a citizen of the United States is an usonano, whereas an amerikano is an inhabitant of the Americas.{{Citation needed}}
Alternative adjectives for U.S. citizens{{Main}}
There are a number of alternatives to the demonym "American" (a citizen of the United States) that do not simultaneously mean any inhabitant of the Americas. One uncommon alternative is "Usonian", which usually describes a certain style of residential architecture designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. Over the years, many other alternatives have also surfaced, but most have long fallen into disuse and obscurity. Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of English Usage says, "The list contains (in approximate historical order from 1789 to 1939) such terms as Columbian, Columbard, Fredonian, Frede, Unisian, United Statesian, Colonican, Appalacian, Usian, Washingtonian, Usonian, Uessian, U-S-ian, Uesican, United Stater."Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of English Usage, p. 88. Merriam-Webster: 1994. Nevertheless, no alternative to "American" is common.{{cite book}}
See also{{Portal box}}

People of the United States
Americas (terminology)
{{-}}
References{{citation style}}
{{reflist}}
Scholarly sources

{{cite book}}
{{cite book}} Chapter 8: “...So near the United States”.
{{cite book}}


External links

{{cite news}}
Diccionario de la Lengua Española entry for americano

{{DEFAULTSORT:American (Word)}}


es:Uso de la palabra americano
pt:Uso da palavra americano(a)
tr:Amerikan (sözcük)