title{{Out of date}}
{{Infobox NRHP}}
NYSE Amex Equities, formerly known as the American Stock Exchange (AMEX) is an American stock exchange situated in New York. AMEX was a mutual organization, owned by its members. Until 1953, it was known as the New York Curb Exchange.{{cite book}}  On January 17, 2008, NYSE Euronext announced it would acquire the American Stock Exchange for $260 million in stock. On October 1, 2008, NYSE Euronext completed acquisition of the American Stock Exchange.{{cite web}} Before the closing of the acquisition, NYSE Euronext announced that the Exchange would be integrated with the Alternext European small-cap exchange and renamed the NYSE Alternext U.S.{{cite web}} In March 2009, NYSE Alternext U.S. was changed to NYSE Amex Equities.{{cite web}}
HistoryIn the early 19th century, many new enterprises sprang up in the railroad and construction industries. The New York Exchange Board had then mandated an organization to have a minimum of 100 stocks in order to trade in their exchange.  Many of these new companies could not meet such requirements to be listed on the Board. A group of non-member brokers catered to the needs of these companies as they traded their stocks outside the registered exchanges. These brokers came to be known as the curbstone brokers, as they conducted their auctions out in the street. 
These brokers often traded stocks that were speculative in nature. With the discovery of oil in the later half of the 19th century, even oil stocks entered into the curb market. By 1865, following the Civil War, stocks in small industrial companies, such as iron and steel, textiles and chemicals were first sold by curbstone brokers. Efforts to organize and standardize the market started early in the twentieth century under Emanuel S. Mendels. In 1908, the New York Curb Market Agency was established, to codify trading practices. In 1911, the curbstone brokers came to be known as the New York Curb Market, which then had a formal constitution with brokerage and listing standards. After several years of outdoor trading, the curbstone brokers moved indoors in 1921 to a building on Greenwich Street in Lower Manhattan. In 1929, the New York Curb Market changed its name to the New York Curb Exchange. Within no time, the Curb Exchange became the leading international stock market, listing more foreign issues than all other U.S. securities markets combined. In 1953 the Curb Exchange was renamed the American Stock Exchange.Paul Kolton was named as president of the exchange in 1971, making him the first person to be selected from within the exchange to serve as its leader, succeeding Ralph S. Saul, who announced his resignation in March 1971.Rustin, Richard E. "American Board Panel Seen Recommending Kolton, No. 2 Man, as Successor to Saul", The Wall Street Journal, May 14, 1971. Accessed October 30, 2010.Kaplan, Thomas. "Paul Kolton, Who Led the American Stock Exchange, Dies at 87", The New York Times, October 29, 2010. Accessed October 29, 2010. In November 1972 Kolton was named as the exchange's first CEO and the first salaried top executive of the exchange.Staff. "Amex Formally Elects Paul Kolton as Chairman, Chief Executive Officer", The Wall Street Journal, November 3, 1972. Accessed October 30, 2010. Kolton opposed the idea of a merger with the New York Stock Exchange while he headed the exchange saying that "two independent, viable exchanges are much more likely to be responsive to new pressures and public needs than a single institution". Kolton announced in July 1977 that he would be leaving his position at the American Exchange in November of that year.via Dow Jones. "Paul Kolton leaving Amex", Pittsburgh Press, July 17, 1977. Accessed October 30, 2010.The American Stock Exchange merged with the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE Euronext) on October 1, 2008. Post merger, the Amex equities business was branded "NYSE Alternext US". As part of the re-branding exercise, NYSE Alternext US was re-branded as NYSE Amex Equities. On December 1, 2008, the Curb Exchange building at 86 Trinity Place was closed, and the Amex Equities trading floor was moved to the NYSE Trading floor at 11 Wall Street.
HoursThe exchange's normal trading sessions are from 9:30am to 4:00pm on all days of the week except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays declared by the Exchange in advance.Market Hours, American Stock Exchange via Wikinvest
See also

List of stock exchanges
New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)
Stock exchange
Economy of New York City
Amex Major Market Index


References{{reflist}}
Further reading

{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}


External links

NYSE Amex Equities
Canadian Stock Exchange Information Database
AMEX Timeline

{{New York City Historic Sites}}
{{National Register of Historic Places in New York}}
{{stock market}}






bg:??????????? ??????? ?????
ca:American Stock Exchange
da:American Stock Exchange
de:NYSE Amex
et:AMEX
es:American Stock Exchange
fr:American Stock Exchange
ko:???? ?????
id:American Stock Exchange
is:Bandaríska kauphöllin
ja:??????????
no:American Stock Exchange
pl:American Stock Exchange
pt:American Stock Exchange
ro:American Stock Exchange
ru:???????????? ???????? ?????
simple:American Stock Exchange
sv:American Stock Exchange
uk:???????????? ??????? ?????
vi:American Stock Exchange
zh:???????