title{{pp-semi-vandalism}}
{{About}}
{{Infobox person}}Amerigo Vespucci (March 9, 1454{{ndash}}February 22, 1512) was an Italian explorer, financier, navigator and cartographer. The Americas are generally believed to have derived their name from the feminized Latin version of his first name.See e.g. Encyclopaedia Britannica Online, Amerigo Vespucci; and Room, Adrian. 2004. Placenames of the world: origins and meanings of the names for over 5000 natural features, countries, capitals, territories, cities and historic sights: America believed to have derived their name from the feminized Latin version of his first name.Rival explanations have been proposed (see  Arciniegas, Germán. Amerigo and the New World: The Life & Times of Amerigo Vespucci. Translated by Harriet de Onís. New York: Octagon Books, 1978.{{specify}}) For example, some have speculated that the name's origin may lie with Richard Amerike http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/tudors/americaname_03.shtml, or with the region Amerrique in Nicaragua. None of these theories has been accepted in mainstream academia yet.
Background
Amerigo Vespucci was born and raised in Florence, in what is now Italy. He was the third son of Ser Nastagio (Anastasio), a Florentine notary, and Lisabetta Mini.C.R. Markham (1894) "Introduction", in The Letters of Amerigo Vespucci and other documents illustrative of his career.  London: Hakluyt.  Amerigo Vespucci was educated by his uncle, Fra Giorgio Antonio Vespucci, a Dominican friar of San Marco in Florence.While his elder brothers were sent to the University of Pisa to pursue scholarly careers, Amerigo Vespucci embraced a mercantile life, and was hired as a clerk by the Florentine commercial house of Medici, headed by Lorenzo de Medici.  Vespucci acquired the favor and protection of Lorenzo Pierfrancesco de Medici who became the head of the business after the elder Lorenzo's death in 1492.  In March 1492, the Medici dispatched the forty-year old Vespucci and Donato Niccolini as confidential agents to look into the Medici branch office in Cadiz (Spain), whose managers and dealings were under suspicion.  In April, 1495, by the intrigues of Bishop Juan Rodríguez de Fonseca, the Crown of Castile broke their monopoly deal with Christopher Columbus and began handing out licenses to other navigators for the West Indies.  Just around this time (1495-96), Vespucci was engaged as the executor of Giannotto Berardi, an Italian merchant who had recently died in Seville. Vespucci organized the fulfillment of Berardi's outstanding contract with the Castilian crown to provide twelve vessels for the Indies.  After these were delivered, Vespucci continued as a provision contractor for Indies expeditions, and is known to have secured beef supplies for at least one (if not two) of Columbus's voyages.
Expeditions
At the invitation of king Manuel I of Portugal, Vespucci participated as observer in several voyages that explored the east coast of South America between 1499 and 1502. Manuel's commander Pedro Álvares Cabral, on his way to the Cape of Good Hope and India in 1500, had discovered Brazil at latitude 16°52'S. Portugal claimed this land by the Treaty of Tordesillas, and the king wished to know whether it was merely an island or part of the continent that Spanish explorers had encountered further north.Vespucci, having already been to the Brazilian shoulder, seemed the person best qualified to go as an observer with the new expedition Manuel was sending. Vespucci did not command at the start–the Portuguese captain was probably Gonçalo Coelho–but ultimately took charge at the request of the Portuguese officers. Vespucci, in all probability, voyaged to America at the time noted, but he did not have command and as yet had no practical experience piloting a ship. On the first of these voyages he was aboard the ship that discovered that South America extended much further south than previously thought.The expeditions became widely known in Europe after two accounts attributed to Vespucci were published between 1502 and 1504. In 1507, Martin Waldseemüller produced a world map on which he named the new continent America after Vespucci's first name, Amerigo. In an accompanying book, Waldseemüller published one of the Vespucci accounts, which led to criticism that Vespucci was trying to upset Christopher Columbus' glory. However, the rediscovery in the 18th century of other letters by Vespucci, primarily the Soderini Letter, has led to the view that the early published accounts could be fabrications, not by Vespucci, but by others.In 1503 Vespucci sailed in Portuguese service again to Brazil, but this expedition failed to make new discoveries. The fleet broke up, the Portuguese commander's ship disappeared, and Vespucci could proceed only a little past Bahia before returning to Lisbon in 1504. He did not sail again, and as there seemed no more work for him in Portugal he returned to Seville, where he settled permanently and where he had earlier married Maria de Cerezo. He was middle-aged, and the fact that there were no children might indicate that Maria was also past her youth.He died on February 22, 1512 in Seville, Spain, of an unknown cause.
Historical roleColumbus never thought Vespucci had tried to steal his laurels, and in 1505 he wrote his son, Diego, saying of Vespucci, "It has always been his wish to please me; he is a man of good will; fortune has been unkind to him as to others; his labors have not brought him the rewards he in justice should have."In 1508, after only two voyages to the Americas, the position of chief of navigation of Spain (piloto mayor de Indias) was created for Vespucci, with the responsibility of planning navigation for voyages to the Indies.Two letters attributed to Vespucci were published during his lifetime. Mundus Novus (New World) was a Latin translation of a lost Italian letter sent from Lisbon to Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici. It describes a voyage to South America in 1501-1502. Mundus Novus was published in late 1502 or early 1503 and soon reprinted and distributed in numerous European countries.Formisano, Luciano (Ed.) (1992). Letters from a New World: Amerigo Vespucci's Discovery of America. New York: Marsilio. ISBN 0-941419-62-2. Pp. xix-xxvi.
Lettera di Amerigo Vespucci delle isole nuovamente trovate in quattro suoi viaggi (Letter of Amerigo Vespucci concerning the isles newly discovered on his four voyages), known as Lettera al Soderini or just Lettera, was a letter in Italian addressed to Piero Soderini. Printed in 1504 or 1505, it claimed to be an account of four voyages to the Americas made by Vespucci between 1497 and 1504. A Latin translation was published by the German Martin Waldseemüller in 1507 in Cosmographiae Introductio, a book on cosmography and geography, as Quattuor Americi Vespuccij navigationes (Four Voyages of Amerigo Vespucci).In 1508, King Ferdinand made Vespucci chief navigator of Spain at a huge salary and commissioned him to found a school of navigation, in order to standardize and modernize navigation techniques used by Iberian sea captains then exploring the world. Vespucci even developed a rudimentary, but fairly accurate method of determining longitude (which only more accurate chronometers would later improve upon).In the 18th century three unpublished familiar letters from Vespucci to Lorenzo de' Medici were rediscovered. One describes a voyage made in 1499-1500 which corresponds with the second of the "four voyages". Another was written from Cape Verde in 1501 in the early part of the third of the four voyages, before crossing the Atlantic. The third letter was sent from Lisbon after the completion of that voyage.Some have suggested that Vespucci, in the two letters published in his lifetime, was exaggerating his role and constructed deliberate fabrications. However, many scholars now believe that the two letters were not written by him but were fabrications by others based in part on genuine letters by Vespucci.
It was the publication and widespread circulation of the letters that might have led Martin Waldseemüller to name the new continent America on his world map of 1507 in Lorraine. Vespucci used a Latinised form of his name, Americus Vespucius, in his Latin writings, which Waldseemüller used as a base for the new name, taking the feminine form America, according to the prevalent view (for other hypotheses, see the footnote in the introduction). The book accompanying the map stated: "I do not see what right any one would have to object to calling this part, after Americus who discovered it and who is a man of intelligence, Amerige, that is, the Land of Americus, or America: since both Europa and Asia got their names from women". Amerigo itself is an Italian form of the medieval Latin Emericus (see also Saint Emeric of Hungary), which through the German form Heinrich (in English, Henry) derived from the Germanic name Haimirich.http://www.thinkbabynames.com/meaning/1/AmerigoThe two disputed letters claim that Vespucci made four voyages to America, while at most two can be verified from other sources. At the moment there is a dispute between historians on when Vespucci visited mainland the first time. Some historians like German Arciniegas and Gabriel Camargo Perez think that his first voyage was done in June 1497 with the Spanish Pilot Juan de la Cosa.
Vespucci's real historical importance may well rest more in his letters, whether he wrote them all or not, than in his discoveries. From these letters, the European public learned about the newly discovered continents of the Americas for the first time; its existence became generally known throughout Europe within a few years of the letters' publication.
Voyages
First VoyageA letter published in 1504 purports to be an account by Vespucci, written to Soderini, of a lengthy visit to the New World, leaving Spain in May 1497 and returning in October 1498.  However, modern scholars have doubted that this voyage took place, and consider this letter a forgery.{{cite web}} {{Dead link}} Whoever did write the letter makes several observations of native customs, including use of hammocks and sweat lodges.{{cite web}}
Second VoyageAbout 1499–1500, Vespucci joined an expedition in the service of Spain, with Alonso de Ojeda (or Hojeda) as the fleet commander. The intention was to sail around the southern end of the African mainland into the Indian Ocean.{{cite book}} After hitting land at the coast of what is now Guyana, the two seem to have separated. Vespucci sailed southward, discovering the mouth of the Amazon River and reaching 6°S, before turning around and seeing Trinidad and the Orinoco River and returning to Spain by way of Hispaniola. The letter, to Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici, claims that Vespucci determined his longitude celestially
on a rainy and stormy day with calm seas, stars could be identified  near the horizon to judge latitude/longitude
  celestially. Although South America's continental shelf
  drops quickly into the deep ocean beyond the Orinoco River,
  the mouth is on the shelf, avoiding the ocean swells
  and waves which hinder visibility of stars near the
  horizon.  Seamen who could navigate from Europe to America
  and back could chart stars on the horizon, especially
  for a cartographer like Vespucci.{{Citation needed}}
on August 23, 1499, while on this voyage. However, that claim may be fraudulent, which could cast doubt on the letter's credibility.
Third voyageThe last certain voyage of Vespucci was led by Gonçalo Coelho in 1501–1502 in the service of Portugal. Departing from Lisbon, the fleet sailed first to Cape Verde where they met two of Pedro Álvares Cabral's ships returning from India. In a letter from Cape Verde, Vespucci says that he hopes to visit the same lands that Álvares Cabral had explored, suggesting that the intention is to sail west to Asia, as on the 1499-1500 voyage. On reaching the coast of Brazil, they sailed south along the coast of South America to Rio de Janeiro's bay. If his own account is to be believed, he reached the latitude of Patagonia before turning back, although this also seems doubtful, since his account does not mention the broad estuary of the Río de la Plata, which he must have seen if he had gotten that far south. Portuguese maps of South America, created after the voyage of Coelho and Vespucci, do not show any land south of present-day Cananéia at 25° S, so this may represent the southernmost extent of their voyages.After the first half of the expedition, Vespucci mapped Alpha and Beta Centauri, as well as the constellation Crux, the Southern Cross. Although these stars had been known to the ancient Greeks, gradual precession had lowered them below the European horizon so that they had been forgotten. On his return to Lisbon, Vespucci wrote in a letter to d'Medici that the land masses they explored were much larger than anticipated and different from the Asia described by Ptolemy or Marco Polo and therefore, must be a New World, that is, a previously unknown fourth continent, after Europe, Asia, and Africa.{{Citation needed}}
Fourth voyageLittle is known of his last voyage in 1503–1504 or even whether it actually took place.
Notes

{{note label}}Europeans had long conceptualized the Afro-Eurasian landmass as divided into the same three continents known today: Europe, Asia, and Africa.  Once cosmographers realized that the New World was not connected to the Old (but before its true geography was fully mapped), they considered the Americas to be a single, fourth continent.
{{reflist}}
References

Amerigo and the New World by Arciniegas, German; Alfred A. Knopf [1955]
Amerigo: the Man Who Gave His Name to America by Fernández-Armesto, Felipe; Weidenfeld &#38; Nicolson [2006] (hardcover, ISBN 0-297-84802-X).
Heroes of American History:  Amerigo Vespucci by Ober, Frederick A.; Harper &#38; Brothers [1907]
Amerigo Vespucci:  Pilot Major by Pohl, Frederick J.; Columbia University Press [1944]
Norbert Schulz: Amerigo Vespucci, Mundus Novus (mit Zweittexten). M.M.O. VERLAG ZUR FÖRDERUNG DES MITTEL- UND NEULATEINISCHEN, Butjadingen 2007. (Neulateinische Texte für den altsprachlichen Unterricht (Vivarium (Series neolatina, Band II))) ISBN 978-3-9811144-2-3
Markham, Clements R. (1894) The Letters of Amerigo Vespucci, and Other Documents Illustrative of His Career. Hakluyt Society. (Reissued by Cambridge University Press, 2010. ISBN 9781108012867)
Amerigo Vespucci by Charles Lester Edwards, Amerigo Vespucci [2009]


Further reading

Martin Waldseemüller, Franz Wieser (Ritter von), Edward Burke (trans), The Cosmographiæ Introductio of Martin Waldseemüller in facsimile: followed by the Four voyages of Amerigo Vespucci, The United States Catholic Historical Society, 1908.


External links{{commons}}
{{Appletons' Poster}}

Canaday, James A. The Life of Amerigo Vespucci
{{gutenberg}}
Vespucci, Amerigo. "Account of His First Voyage 1497 (Letter to Pier Soderini, Gonfalonier of the Republic of Florence)". Internet Modern History Sourcebook-Fordham University (U.S.)
Mason, Wyatt, 'I am America. (And So?)' The New York Times, December 12, 2007.
1507 Waldseemüller Map from the US Library of Congress
TOPS Lecture at Library of Congress, Drs. France and Easton
World Digital Library presentation of the 1507 Waldseemüller Map in the Library of Congress.  This is the only known surviving copy of the wall map edition of which it is believed 1,000 copies were printed.  Four originals of the 1507 globe gore map are in existence in Germany, UK and US.

{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Vespucci, Amerigo}}









{{Link GA}}af:Amerigo Vespucci
ar:?????? ???????
an:Amerigo Vespucci
ast:Amerigo Vespucci
az:Ameriqo Vespuççi
be:??????? ???????
bs:Amerigo Vespucci
br:Amerigo Vespucci
bg:??????? ???????
ca:Amerigo Vespucci
cs:Amerigo Vespucci
da:Amerigo Vespucci
de:Amerigo Vespucci
et:Amerigo Vespucci
el:???????? ?????????
es:Américo Vespucio
eo:Amerigo Vespucci
eu:Ameriko Vespuzio
fa:?????? ??????
fr:Amerigo Vespucci
gl:Amerigo Vespucci
ko:???? ????
hi:??????? ????????
hr:Amerigo Vespucci
id:Amerigo Vespucci
is:Amerigo Vespucci
it:Amerigo Vespucci
he:?????? ?????'?
kn:??????? ????????
ka:??????? ???????
sw:Amerigo Vespucci
la:Americus Vespucius
lv:Amerigo Vespu?i
lt:Amerigas Vespu?is
hu:Amerigo Vespucci
mk:??????? ???????
mr:??????? ????????
arz:??????? ????????
nl:Amerigo Vespucci (persoon)
ja:???????????
no:Amerigo Vespucci
oc:Amerigo Vespucci
pap:Amerigo Vespucci
nds:Amerigo Vespucci
pl:Amerigo Vespucci
pt:Américo Vespúcio
ro:Amerigo Vespucci
ru:????????, ???????
sq:Amerigo Vespucci
scn:Amerigu Vespucci
simple:Amerigo Vespucci
sk:Amerigo Vespucci
sl:Amerigo Vespucci
szl:Amerigo Vespucci
sr:??????? ???????
fi:Amerigo Vespucci
sv:Amerigo Vespucci
th:??????? ????????
tr:Amerigo Vespucci
uk:??????? ????????
vi:Amerigo Vespucci
yi:??????? ?????????
zh:????·????