title{{Other uses}}
{{Infobox mineral}}Amethyst is a violet variety of quartz often used in jewelry. The name comes from the Ancient Greek ? a- ("not") and ???????? methustos ("intoxicated"), a reference to the belief that the stone protected its owner from drunkenness; the ancient Greeks and Romans wore amethyst and made drinking vessels of it in the belief that it would prevent intoxication.  It is one of several forms of quartz.  Amethyst is the traditional birthstone for February.
StructureAmethyst is the purple variety of quartz (SiO2), containing an impurity of iron, which gives the violet color to the mineral.{{Greenwood&Earnshaw2nd}}  The hardness of the mineral is the same as quartz's, thus it is suitable for use in jewelry.
Hue and toneAmethyst occurs in primary hues from a light pinkish violet to a deep purple. Amethyst may exhibit one or both secondary hues, red and blue. The ideal grade is called "Deep Siberian" and has a primary purple hue of around 75–80%, 15–20% blue and (depending on the light source) red secondary hues.Secrets of the Gem Trade; The Connoisseur's Guide to Precious Gemstones Richard W Wise, Brunswick House Press, Lenox, Massachutes., 2005 ISBN 0-9728223-8-0 Green quartz is sometimes incorrectly called green amethyst, which is an actual misnomer and not an acceptable name for the material, the proper terminology being Prasiolite. It is actually against FTC Guidelines to call prasiolite green amethyst.{{Citation needed}} Other names for green quartz are vermarine, greened amethyst, or lime citrine.

Of very variable intensity, the color of amethyst is often laid out in stripes parallel to the final faces of the crystal.  One aspect in the art of lapidary involves the correct cutting to place the color correctly in order to make the tone of the cut stones homogeneous. The fact that sometimes only a thin surface layer of violet color is present in the stone, or that the color is not homogeneous often makes for a difficult cutting. The color of amethyst has been demonstrated to result from substitution of trivalent iron (Fe3+) in the structure.Dennen, William H. and Anita M. Puckett, On the Chemistry and Color of Amethyst, Canadian Mineralogist, V. 11, pp. 448-456 (1972) When heated, amethyst may turm yellow-orange, yellow-brown, or dark brownish and may resemble citrine.Mindat.org Amethyst
History
Amethyst was used as a gemstone by the ancient Egyptians and was largely employed in antiquity for intaglio engraved gems.Gems, Notes and Extracts Augosto Castellani (famous Italian 19th century jeweler), page 34, London, Bell and Daldy, 1871 ISBN 1-141-06174-0The Greeks believed amethyst gems could prevent intoxication,Diamonds, Pearls and Precious Stones Marcell N Smith, Griffith Stillings Press, Boston, Massachutes., 1913, page 74 while medieval European soldiers wore amethyst amulets as protection in battle – the reason for this being that amethysts are believed to heal people and keep them cool-headed."Curious Lore of Precious Stones" George Frederick Kunz, Lippincott Company, Philadelphia & London, 1913 Beads of amethyst were found in Anglo-Saxon graves in England.The Blackwell encyclopaedia of Anglo-Saxon England,  page 261 A large geode, or "amethyst-grotto", from near Santa Cruz in southern Brazil was presented at the 1902 exhibition in Düsseldorf, Germany.In the 19th century, the color of amethyst was attributed to the presence of manganese. However, since it is capable of being greatly altered and even discharged by heat, the color was believed by some authorities to be from an organic source. Ferric thiocyanate has been suggested, and sulfur was said to have been detected in the mineral.{{sfn}}
Synthetic amethystSynthetic amethyst is produced by gamma-ray, x-ray or electron beam irradiation of clear quartz which has been first doped with ferric impurities. On exposure to heat, the irradiation effects can be partially cancelled and amethyst generally becomes yellow or even green, and much of the citrine, cairngorm, or yellow quartz of jewelry is said to be merely "burnt amethyst".{{cite book}}Synthetic amethyst is made to imitate the best quality amethyst. Its chemical and physical properties are so similar to that of natural amethyst that it can not be differentiated with absolute certainty without advanced gemnological testing (which is often cost-prohibitive). There is one test based on "Brazil law twinning" (a form of quartz twinning where right and left hand quartz structures are combined in a single crystal{{cite web}}) which can be used to identify synthetic amethyst rather easily. It is possible to synthesize twinned amethyst, but this type is not available in large quantities in the market.
MythologyThe Greek word "amethystos" may be translated as "not drunken", from Greek a-, "not" + methustos, "intoxicated".The American Heritage Dictionary Amethyst was considered to be a strong antidote against drunkenness, which is why wine goblets were often carved from it. In Greek mythology, Dionysus, the god of intoxication, and of wine, was pursuing a maiden named Amethystos, who refused his affections. Amethystos prayed to the gods to remain chaste, a prayer which the goddess Artemis answered, transforming her into a white stone. Humbled by Amethystos's desire to remain chaste, Dionysus poured wine over the stone as an offering, dyeing the crystals purple.Variations of the story include that Dionysus had been insulted by a mortal and swore to slay the next mortal who crossed his path, creating fierce tigers to carry out his wrath. The mortal turned out to be a beautiful young woman, Amethystos, who was on her way to pay tribute to Artemis. Her life was spared by Artemis, who transformed the maiden into a statue of pure crystalline quartz to protect her from the brutal claws. Dionysus wept tears of wine in remorse for his action at the sight of the beautiful statue. The god's tears then stained the quartz purple.The amethyst Gemstone.org Another variation involves the titan Rhea presenting Dionysus with the amethyst stone to preserve the wine-drinker's sanity.Nonnus, Dionysiaca, 12. 380
Geographic distribution
Amethyst is produced in abundance from the state of Minas Gerais in Brazil where it occurs in large geodes within volcanic rocks. Many of the hollow agates of southwestern Brazil and Uruguay contain a crop of amethyst crystals in the interior. Artigas, Uruguay and neighboring Brazilian state Rio Grande do Sul are large world producers exceeding in quantity Minas Gerais, as well as Mato Grosso, Espirito Santo, Bahia, and Ceará states, all amethyst producers of importance in Brazil.It is also found and mined in South Korea. The largest opencast amethyst vein in the world is in Maissau, Lower Austria. Much fine amethyst comes from Russia, especially from near Mursinka in the Ekaterinburg district, where it occurs in drusy cavities in granitic rocks. Many localities in south India yield amethyst. One of the largest global amethyst producers is Zambia in southern Africa with an annual production of about 1000 tonnes.Amethyst occurs at many localities in the United States.{{sfn}} Among these may be mentioned: the Mazatzal Mountain region in Gila and Maricopa Counties, Arizona; Red Feather Lakes, near Ft Collins, Colorado; Amethyst Mountain, Texas; Yellowstone National Park; Delaware County, Pennsylvania; Haywood County, North Carolina; Deer Hill and Stow, Maine and in the Lake Superior region of Minnesota, Wisconsin, Michigan, and Ontario in Canada. Amethyst is relatively common in Ontario, and in various locations throughout Nova Scotia. The largest amethyst mine in North America is located in Thunder Bay, Ontario.

ValueUp until the 18th century, amethyst was included in the cardinal, or most valuable, gemstones (along with diamond, sapphire, ruby, and emerald). However, since the discovery of extensive deposits in locations such as Brazil, it has lost most of its value.Collectors look for depth of color, possibly with red flashes if cut conventionally.CIBJO guidelines, The highest grade amethyst (called "Deep Russian") is exceptionally rare and therefore, when one is found, its value is dependent on the demand of collectors. It is, however, still orders of magnitude lower than the highest grade sapphires or rubies (padparadscha sapphire or "pigeon's blood" ruby).
See also

List of minerals
Specimen Ridge


References{{Reflist}}

Attribution
{{1911}}


External links{{Commons}}

Mindat: mineralogical information, crystallography and nomenclature
gemstone.org - International colored Gemstone Association


{{Jewellery}}
{{Silica minerals}}


ar:????
an:Amatista
az:Ametist
be:???????
be-x-old:???????
bg:???????
ca:Ametista
cs:Ametyst
da:Ametyst
de:Amethyst
et:Ametüst
el:?????????
es:Amatista
eo:Ametisto
eu:Amatista
fa:???????
fr:Améthyste
ga:Aimitis
gu:????????
ko:???
hi:????????
io:Ametisto
id:Batu kecubung
is:Ametýst
it:Ametista
he:?????
jv:Watu Akik Kecubung Kasihan
kn:?????????? (???????)
ka:?????????
kk:???????
la:Amethystus
lv:Ametists
lt:Ametistas
hu:Ametiszt
mk:???????
ml:???????????
nah:Tlapaltehuil?tl
nl:Amethist
ja:?????
no:Ametyst
nn:Ametyst
pl:Ametyst
pt:Ametista
ro:Ametist
ru:???????
sah:???????
simple:Amethyst
sk:Ametyst
sl:Ametist
sr:???????
fi:Ametisti
sv:Ametist
th:????????????
tr:Ametist
uk:???????
ur:????? ???????
ug:?????? ?????
vi:Ametit
wo:Ametist
bat-smg:Amet?sts
zh:???