title

In organic chemistry, an amide is an organic compound that contains the functional group consisting of a carbonyl group (R-C=O) linked to a nitrogen atom (N).  The term refers both to a class of compounds and a functional group within those compounds. The remainder of this article is about the carbonyl-nitrogen sense of amide.  More generally, amides are compounds with the structural subunit -E(O)xNR2, where E = S (x= 2), P (x = 1) and R is an organic group or hydrogen.  The more common "organic amides" fit within this class (E = C, x = 1).  Examples include phosphoramide and sulfonamides.http://goldbook.iupac.org/A00266.htmlThe term amide also refers to deprotonated form of ammonia (NH3) or an amine, often represented as anions R2N&ndash;. For discussion of these "anionic amides," see the articles sodium amide and lithium diisopropylamide.  
Structure and bondingThe simplest amides are derivatives of ammonia wherein one hydrogen atom has been replaced by an acyl group.  The ensemble is generally represented as RC(O)NH2.  Closely related and even more numerous are amides derived from primary amines (R'NH2) with the formula RC(O)NHR'.  Amides are also commonly derived from secondary amines (R'RNH) with the formula RC(O)NR'R.   Amide are usually regarded as derivatives of carboxylic acids in which the hydroxyl group has been replaced by an amine or ammonia.


The lone pair of electrons on the nitrogen is delocalized into the carbonyl, thus forming a partial double bond between N and the carbonyl carbon. Consequently the nitrogen in amides is not pyramidal.  It is estimated that acetamide is described by resonance structure A for 62% and by B for 28%"Amide Resonance" Correlates with a Breadth of C-N Rotation Barriers Carl R. Kemnitz and Mark J. Loewen J. Am. Chem. Soc.; 2007; 129(9) pp 2521 - 2528; (Article) {{DOI}}
Nomenclature{{Main}}
In the usual nomenclature, one adds the term "amide" to the stem of the parent acid's name. For instance, the amide derived from acetic acid is named acetamide (CH3CONH2).  IUPAC recommends ethanamide, but this and related formal names are rarely encountered.  When the amide is derived from a primary or secondary amine, the substitutents on nitrogen are indicated first in the name. Thus, the amide formed from dimethylamine and acetic acid is N,N-dimethylacetamide (CH3CONMe2, where Me = CH3).  Usually even this name is simplified to dimethylacetamide. Cyclic amides are called lactams; they are necessarily secondary or tertiary amides.  Functional groups consisting of -P(O)NR2 and -SO2NR2 are phosphonamides and sulfonamides, respectively.Organic Chemistry IUPAC Gnomenclature. Rules C-821. Amides http://www.acdlabs.com/iupac/nomenclature/79/r79_540.htm
PronunciationSome chemists make a pronunciation distinction between the two, saying {{IPAc-en}} for the carbonyl-nitrogen compound and {{IPAc-en}} for the anion. Others substitute one of these with {{IPAc-en}}, while still others pronounce both {{IPAc-en}}, making them homonyms.
Properties
BasicityCompared to amines, amides are very weak bases. While the conjugate acid of an amine has a pKa of about 9.5, the conjugate acid of an amide has a pKa around -0.5. Therefore amides don't have as clearly noticeable acid-base properties in water. This lack of basicity is explained by the electron-withdrawing nature of the carbonyl group where the lone pair of electrons on the nitrogen is delocalized by resonance.  On the other hand, amides are much stronger bases than carboxylic acids, esters, aldehydes, and ketones (conjugated acid pKa between -6 and -10). It is estimated  in silico that acetamide is represented by resonance structure A for 62% and by B for 28%. Resonance is largely prevented in the very strained quinuclidone.Because of the greater electronegativity of oxygen, the carbonyl (C=O) is a stronger dipole than the N-C dipole. The presence of a C=O dipole and, to a lesser extent a N-C dipole, allows amides to act as H-bond acceptors. In primary and secondary amides, the presence of N-H dipoles allows amides to function as H-bond donors as well. Thus amides can participate in hydrogen bonding with water and other protic solvents; the oxygen atom can accept hydrogen bonds from water and the N-H hydrogen atoms can donate H-bonds. As a result of interactions such as these, the water solubility of amides is greater than that of corresponding hydrocarbons.The proton of a primary or secondary amide does not dissociate readily under normal conditions; its pKa is usually well above 15.  Conversely, under extremely acidic conditions, the carbonyl oxygen can become protonated with a pKa of roughly &ndash;1.
SolubilityThe solubilities of amides and esters are roughly comparable. Typically amides are less soluble than comparable amines and carboxylic acids since these compounds can both donate and accept hydrogen bonds.  Tertiary amides, with the important exception of N,N-dimethylformamide, exhibit low solubility in water.
CharacterizationThe presence of the functional group is generally easily established, at least in small molecules. They are the most common non-basic functional group.  They can be distinguished from nitro and cyano groups by their IR spectra. Amides exhibit a moderately intense ?CO band near 1650&nbsp;cm?1.  By 1H NMR spectroscopy, CONHR signals occur at low fields.  In X-ray crystallography, the C(O)N center together with the three immediately adjacent atoms characteristically define a plane.
Applications and occurrenceAmides are pervasive in nature and technology as structural materials. The amide linkage is easily formed, confers structural rigidity, and resists hydrolysis.  Nylons are polyamides as are the very resilient materials Aramid, Twaron, and Kevlar.  Amide linkages in a biochemical context are called peptide linkages.  Amide linkages constitute a defining molecular feature of proteins, the secondary structure of which is due in part to the hydrogen bonding abilities of amides.  Low molecular weight amides, such as dimethylformamide (HC(O)N(CH3)2), are common solvents.  Many drugs are amides, including penicillin and LSD.
Amide synthesisAmides are commonly formed via reactions of a carboxylic acid with an amine.  Many methods are known for driving the unfavorable equilibrium to the right:

RCO2H  +  R&#39;R&#34;NH   \overrightarrow{\leftarrow}   RC(O)NR&#39;R&#34;  +  H2O
For the most part, these reactions involve "activating" the carboxylic acid and the best known method, the Schotten-Baumann reaction, which involves conversion of the acid to the acid chlorides:





Reaction name  Substrate  Details 
Beckmann rearrangement cyclic ketone reagent: hydroxylamine and acid 
Schmidt reaction ketones reagent: hydrazoic acid 
nitrile hydrolysis nitrile reagent: water; acid catalyst 
Willgerodt-Kindler reaction aryl alkyl ketones  sulfur and morpholine 
Passerini reaction  carboxylic acid, ketone or aldehyde  
Ugi reaction isocyanide, carboxylic acid, ketone, primary amine  
Bodroux reactionBodroux F., Bull. Soc. Chim. France, 1905, 33, 831;Bodroux reaction at the Institute of Chemistry, Skopje, Macedonia Link carboxylic acid, Grignard reagent with an aniline derivative ArNHR&#39;  
Chapman rearrangementSchulenberg, J. W.; Archer, S. Org. React. 1965, 14.A. W. Chapman, "CCLXIX. - Imino-aryl ethers. Part III. The molecular rearrangement of N-phenylbenziminophenyl ether", Journal of the Chemical Society, Transactions, 127:1992-1998, 1925. {{DOI}} aryl imino ether for N,N-diaryl amides. The reaction mechanism is based on a nucleophilic aromatic substitution.Advanced organic Chemistry, Reactions, mechanisms and structure 3ed. Jerry March ISBN 0-471-85472-7  
Leuckart amide synthesis Ueber einige Reaktionen der aromatischen Cyanate R. Leuckart Berichte der deutschen chemischen Gesellschaft Volume 18 Issue 1, Pages 873 - 877 1885{{DOI}} isocyanate Reaction of arene with isocyanate catalysed by aluminium trichloride, formation of aromatic amide. 

Other methodsThe seemingly simple direct reaction between an alcohol and an amine to an amide was not tried until 2007 when a special ruthenium-based catalyst was reported to be effective in a so-called dehydrogenative acylation:Direct Synthesis of Amides from Alcohols and Amines with Liberation of H2 Chidambaram Gunanathan, Yehoshoa Ben-David, David Milstein Science 10 August 2007: Vol. 317. no. 5839, pp. 790 - 792 {{DOI}} 



The generation of hydrogen gas compensates for unfavorable thermodynamics. The reaction is believed to proceed by one dehydrogenation of the alcohol to the aldehyde followed by formation of a hemiaminal and the after a second dehydrogenation to the amide. Elimination of water in the hemiaminal to the imine is not observed.
Amide reactionsAmides undergo many chemical reactions, usually through an attack on the carbonyl breaking the carbonyl double bond and forming a tetrahedral intermediate.  Thiols, hydroxyls and amines are all known to serve as nucleophiles. Owing to their resonance stabilization, amides are less reactive under physiological conditions than esters.  Enzymes, e.g. peptidases or artificial catalysts, are known to accelerate the hydrolysis reactions.  They can be hydrolysed in hot alkali, as well as in strong acidic conditions. Acidic conditions yield the carboxylic acid and the ammonium ion while basic hydrolysis yield the carboxylate ion and ammonia.  Amides are also versatile precursors to many other functional groups.

Reaction name  Product  Comment 
dehydration nitrile reagent: phosphorus pentoxide 
Hofmann rearrangement amine with one fewer carbon atoms reagents: bromine and sodium hydroxide 
amide reduction amine reagent: lithium aluminium hydride 
Vilsmeier-Haack reaction imine POCl3, aromatic substrate, formamide 

See also

Metal amides


References{{reflist}}
External links

Amide synthesis (coupling reaction) - Synthetic protocols from organic-reaction.com
IUPAC Compendium of Chemical Terminology

{{Functional Groups}}
ar:????
bg:????
ca:Amida (grup funcional)
cs:Amidy
da:Amid (funktionel gruppe)
de:Amide
et:Amiidid
es:Amida
eo:Amido
fa:????
fr:Amide
gl:Amida
ko:????
hi:?????
io:Amido
id:Amida
it:Ammidi
he:????
lv:Am?di
lt:Amidai
hu:Amidok
mk:????
nl:Amide
ja:???
no:Amid
pl:Amidy
pt:Amida
ro:Amid?
ru:?????
simple:Amide
sl:Amid
sr:Amid
fi:Amidi
sv:Amid
tr:Amit
uk:?????
zh:??