titleAmmianus Marcellinus (English /?æmi'e?n?s ?m?(r)s?l'a?n?s/) (325/330–after 391) was a fourth-century Roman historian. He wrote the penultimate major historical account surviving from Antiquity (the last was written by Procopius). His work chronicled in Latin the history of Rome from 96 to 378, although only the sections covering the period 353–378 are extant.Encyclopædia Britannica Online – Ammianus Marcellinus{{cite encyclopedia}}
BiographyAmmianus was born between 325 and 330 in the Greek-speaking East,Illustrated Encyclopedia of the Classical World, Israel Shatzman, Michael Avi-Yonah, 1975 Harper and Row, p.37, ISBN 0060101784 East and West Through Fifteen Centuries: Being a General History from B.C. 44 to A.D. 1453, George Frederick Young, 1916 Longmans, Green and Co, p. 336 University of California Publications in Linguistics, University of California, Berkeley, 1943 University of California Press, p. 3 Leviathan, Thomas Hobbes, Cambridge University Press, p. lxvii. possibly at Antioch.The possibility hinges on whether he was the recipient of a surviving letter to a Marcellinus from a contemporary, Libanius – Matthews 1989: 8. The surviving books of his history, the Res Gestae, cover the years 353 to 378.The Eye of Command, Kimberly Kagan, p. 23. Ammianus served as a soldier in the army of Constantius II in Gaul and Persia.He was "a former soldier and a Greek" (miles quondam et graecus),Amm. 31.16.9 he tells us, and his enrollment among the elite protectores domestici (household guards) shows that he was of noble birth. He entered the army at an early age, when Constantius II was emperor of the East, and was sent to serve under Ursicinus, governor of Nisibis in Mesopotamia, and magister militum.He returned to Italy with Ursicinus, when he was recalled by Constantius, and accompanied him on the expedition against Claudius Silvanus, who had been forced by the allegedly unjust accusations of his enemies into proclaiming himself emperor in Gaul. With Ursicinus he went twice to the East. On one occasion he was separated from Ursicinus and took refuge in Amida, which was then besieged by the Sassanid king Shapur II; he barely escaped with his life.The Eye of Command, Kimberly Kagan pp29-30  When Ursicinus lost his office and the favour of Constantius, Ammianus seems to have shared his downfall; but under Julian, Constantius's successor, he regained his position. He accompanied this emperor, for whom he expresses enthusiastic admiration, in his campaigns against the Alamanni and the Sassanids. After the death of Julian, he took part in the retreat of Jovian as far as Antioch. He was residing in Antioch in 372 when one Theodorus was thought to have been identified by divination as a new Emperor, successor to Valens, and with many others implicated by the use of torture, cruelly punished. Though pagan, he was mostly tolerant of Christians.{{cite book}}
WorkAt Rome, he wrote in Latin a history of the Roman empire from the accession of Nerva (96) to the death of Valens at the Battle of Adrianople (378),The Eye of Command, Kimberly Kagan, p. 22. in effect writing a continuation of the history of Tacitus. He presumably completed the work before 391, since at 22.16.12 he praises the Serapeum in Egypt as the glory of the empire, and the temple was destroyed by Christians at the end of that year. Res Gestae (Rerum gestarum Libri XXXI) was originally in thirty-one books, but the first thirteen are lost (modern historian T.D. Barnes argues that the original was actually thirty-six books, which would mean that eighteen books had been lost). The surviving eighteen books cover the period from 353 to 378. As a whole it has been considered extremely valuable, being a clear, comprehensive and in general impartial account of events by a contemporary. Like many ancient historians, Ammianus had a strong political and religious agenda to pursue, however, and he contrasted Constantius II with Julian to the former's constant disadvantage; like all ancient writers he was skilled in rhetoric, and this shows in his work.
CritiqueEdward Gibbon judged Ammianus "an accurate and faithful guide, who composed the history of his own times without indulging the prejudices and passions which usually affect the mind of a contemporary."Gibbon, Edward, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Chapter 26.5 But he also condemned Ammianus for lack of literary flair: "The coarse and undistinguishing pencil of Ammianus has delineated his bloody figures with tedious and disgusting accuracy."Gibbon, Chapter 25. Austrian historian Ernst Stein praised Ammianus as "the greatest literary genius that the world produced between Tacitus and Dante".E. Stein, Geschichte des spätrömischen Reiches, Vienna 1928.According to Kimberly Kagan, his accounts of battles emphasize the experience of the soldiers but at the cost of ignoring the bigger picture.  As a result it is difficult for the reader to understand why the battles he describes had the outcome they did.The Eye of Command, Kimberly Kagan, pp. 27–29.  Scholars have often believed that Ammianus' work was intended for public recitation for two reasons: the overwhelming presence of accentual clausulae, which implies that it was intended to be read aloud; and epistle 1063 of Libanius to a Marcellinus of Rome which refers to public recitations. However, virtually all major works of Greek and Latin prose possessed such clausulae; and some scholars have rejected the identification of Libanius' Marcellinus with Ammianus, since Marcellinus was a very common name and the tone suggests Libanius was addressing a man much younger than himself (Ammianus was his contemporary). It is a striking fact that Ammianus, though a professional soldier, gives excellent pictures of social and economic problems, and in his attitude to the non-Roman peoples of the empire he is far more broad-minded than writers like Livy and Tacitus; his digressions on the various countries he had visited are particularly interesting.  Ammianus' work contains a detailed description of the tsunami in Alexandria which devastated the metropolis and the shores of the eastern Mediterranean on 21 July 365. His report describes accurately the characteristic sequence of earthquake, retreat of the sea and sudden giant wave.{{cite journal}} Note that in the fifth century BC the Greek historian Thucydides had already connected these seismic events in his Peloponnesian War(see Book I, 22).His work has suffered terribly from the manuscript transmission. Aside from the loss of the first thirteen books, the remaining eighteen are in many places corrupt and lacunose. The sole surviving manuscript from which almost every other is derived is a ninth-century Carolingian text, V, produced in Fulda from an insular exemplar. The only independent textual source for Ammianus lies in M, another ninth-century Frankish codex which was, unfortunately, unbound and placed in other codices during the fifteenth century. Only six leaves of M survive; however, the printed edition of Gelenius (G) is considered to be based on M, making it an important witness to the textual tradition of the Res Gestae.Clark, Text Tradition.
Notes{{Reflist}}
References and further reading

Scholars of Ammianus use Wolfgang Seyfarth&#39;s critical edition, Rerum gestarum libri qui supersunt (in 2 vols). Leipzig: Teubner, 1978.
Students often use the poor English translation of J.C. Rolfe in the Loeb Classical Library, 1935–1940 with many reprintings.
Walter Hamilton (trans.) The Later Roman Empire (AD 354–378). Penguin Classics, 1986. An abridged, but superior, translation.
Barnes, Timothy D. Ammianus Marcellinus and the Representation of Historical Reality (Cornell Studies in Classical Philology). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998 (hardcover, ISBN 0-8014-3526-9).
Clark, Charles Upson. The Text Tradition of Ammianus Marcellinus. Ph.D. Diss. Yale: 1904.
Crump, Gary A.  Ammianus Marcellinus as a military historian. Steiner, 1975, ISBN 3515019847.
Drijvers, Jan and David Hunt. Late Roman World and its Historian. Routledge, 1999, ISBN 041520271X.
Kelly, Gavin. Ammianus Marcellinus: The Allusive Historian.  Cambridge University Press, 2008, ISBN 9780521842990.
Matthews, J. The Roman Empire of Ammianus. Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989.
Rowell, Henry Thompson. Ammianus Marcellinus, soldier-historian of the late Roman Empire. University of Cincinnati, 1964.
Sabbah, Guy. La Méthode d'Ammien Marcellin. Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 1978.
Seager, Robin. Ammianus Marcellinus: Seven Studies in His Language and Thought.  Univ of Missouri Pr, 1986, ISBN 0826204953.
Thompson, E.A. The Historical Work of Ammianus Marcellinus. London: Cambridge University Press, 1947.



{{1911}}


External links{{wikisource author}}

Ammianus Marcellinus on-line project
Ammianus Marcellinus' works in Latin at the Latin Library
Ammianus Marcellinus' works in English at the Tertullian Project with introduction on the manuscripts


{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Marcellinus, Ammianus}}







{{Link GA}}
{{Link FA}}als:Ammianus Marcellinus
ar:??????? ???????????
bn:??????????? ????????????
be:????? ????????
bg:????? ????????
ca:Ammià Marcel·lí
cs:Ammianus Marcellinus
cy:Ammianus Marcellinus
da:Ammianus Marcellinus
de:Ammianus Marcellinus
el:???????? ???????????
es:Amiano Marcelino
fa:??????? ?????????
fr:Ammien Marcellin
fy:Ammianus Marsellinus
gl:Ammiano Marcelino
hy:????????? ???????????
it:Ammiano Marcellino
he:??????? ?????????
ka:??????? ???????????
kk:?????????
la:Ammianus Marcellinus
lt:Amianas Marcelinas
hu:Ammianus Marcellinus
mk:?????? ????????
ml:???????? ??????????
nl:Ammianus Marcellinus
ja:?????????????
no:Ammianus Marcellinus
pms:Amian Marslin
pl:Ammianus Marcellinus
pt:Amiano Marcelino
ro:Ammianus Marcellinus
ru:?????? ?????????
sq:Ammianus Marcellinus
scn:Ammianu Marcillinu
sk:Ammianus Marcellinus
sr:?????? ????????
sh:Amijan Marcelin
fi:Ammianus Marcellinus
sv:Ammianus Marcellinus
tr:Ammianus Marcellinus
uk:?????? ?????????
zh:?????·??????