titleAnaxarchus ({{IPAc-en}}; {{lang-el}}; c. 380 - c. 320 BC) was a Greek philosopher of the school of Democritus. Together with Pyrrho, he accompanied Alexander the Great into Asia. The reports of his philosophical views suggest that he was a forerunner of the Greek skeptics.
LifeAnaxarchus was born at Abdera in Thrace. He was the companion and friend of Alexander the Great in his Asiatic campaigns. According to Diogenes Laertius, in response to Alexander's claim to have been the son of Zeus-Ammon, Anaxarchus pointed to his bleeding wound and remarked, "See the blood of a mortal, not ichor, such as flows from the veins of the immortal gods."Diogenes Laertius, Lives, ix. 60 Diogenes Laertius also says that Nicocreon, the tyrant of Cyprus, commanded him to be pounded to death in a mortar, and that he endured this torture with fortitude and Cicero relates the same story.Diogenes Laertius, Lives, ix. 58Plutarch tells a story that at Bactra, in 327 BC in a debate with Callisthenes, he advised all to worship Alexander as a god even during his lifetime, is with greater probability attributed to the Sicilian Cleon.When Alexander was trying to show that he is divine so that the Greeks and Macedonians would perform proskynesis to him, Anaxarchus said that Alexander could "more justly be considered a god than Dionysus or Heracles" (Arrian, 104)
PhilosophyVery little is known about his philosophical views. It is thought that he represents a link between the atomism of Democritus, and the skepticism of Pyrrho.Anaxarchus is said to have studied under Diogenes of Smyrna, who in turn studied under Metrodorus of Chios, who used to declare that he knew nothing, not even the fact that he knew nothing. According to Sextus Empiricus, Anaxarchus "compared existing things to a scene-painting and supposed them to resemble the impressions experienced in sleep or madness."Sextus Empiricus, Against the Logicians, 7.88. It was under the influence of Anaxarchus that Pyrrho is said to have adopted "a most noble philosophy,&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;. taking the form of agnosticism and suspension of judgement."Diogenes Laertius, Lives, ix. 61 Anaxarchus is said to have praised Pyrrho's "indifference and sang-froid."Diogenes Laertius, Lives, ix. 63 Anaxarchus is said to have possessed "fortitude and contentment in life," which earned him the epithet eudaimonikos ("fortunate"), which may imply that he held the end of life to be eudaimonia.
References{{reflist}}
External links

{{iep}}
{{ws}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Anaxarchus}}








be:????????
ca:Anaxarc
de:Anaxarch
es:Anaxarco
fr:Anaxarque
gl:Anaxarco
hr:Anaksarh
is:Anaxarkos
it:Anassarco
hu:Anaxarkhosz
nl:Anaxarchos
pl:Anaksarchos z Abdery
ru:????????
fi:Anaksarkhos