titleAnaximenes ({{lang-grc}}) of Lampsacus (c. 380 – 320 BC) was a Greek rhetorician and historian.
Rhetorical worksAnaximenes was a pupil of ZoilusD.A. Russell, "Anaximenes (2)," Oxford Classical Dictionary, 3rd ed., rev., 2003. and, like his teacher, wrote a work on Homer. As a rhetorician, he was a determined opponent of Isocrates and his school. He is generally regarded as the author of the Rhetoric to Alexander, an Art of Rhetoric included in the traditional corpus of Aristotle's works.  Quintilian seems to refer to this work under Anaximenes' name in Institutio Oratoria 3.4.9, as the Italian Renaissance philologist Piero Vettori first recognized.  This attribution has, however, been disputed by some scholars.The hypothesis to Isocrates' Helen mentions that Anaximenes, too, had written a Helen, "though it is more a defense speech (apologia) than an encomium," and concludes that he was "the man who has written about Helen" to whom Isocrates refers (Isoc. Helen 14).  Jebb entertained the possibility that this work survives in the form of the Encomium of Helen ascribed to Gorgias: "It appears not improbable that Anaximenes may have been the real author of the work ascribed to Gorgias."R.C. Jebb, The Attic Orators, London, 1893, vol. II, p. 98.According to Pausanias (6.18.6), Anaximenes was "the first who practised the art of speaking extemporaneously."  He also worked as a logographer, having written the speech prosecuting Phryne according to Diodorus Periegetes (quoted by Athenaeus XIII.591e).  The "ethical" fragments preserved in Stobaeus' Florilegium may represent "some philosophical book."
Historical worksAnaximenes wrote a history of Greece in twelve books, stretching from the gods' origins to the death of Epaminondas at the Battle of Mantinea (Hellenica, {{lang-grc}}), and a history of Philip of Macedon (Philippica).  He was a favorite of Alexander the Great, whom he accompanied in his Persian campaigns, and wrote a third historical work on Alexander.  (However, Pausanias 6.18.6 expresses doubt about his authorship of an epic poem on Alexander.)  He was one of the eight exemplary historiographers included in the Alexandrian canon.Didymus reports that the work transmitted as speech 11 of Demosthenes (Against the Letter of Philip) could be found in almost identical form in Book 7 of Anaximenes' Philippica, and many scholars regard the work as a historiographic composition by Anaximenes.Raphael Sealey, Demosthenes in His Time, Oxford, 1993, pp. 239f.  The Letter of Philip (speech 12) to which speech 11 seems to respond may also be by Anaximenes, or it may be an authentic letter by Philip, perhaps written with the aid of his advisers. The more ambitious theory of Wilhelm Nitsche, which assigned to Anaximenes a larger part of the Demosthenic corpus (speeches 10-13 and 25, letters 1-4, proems), can be rejected.Jacoby, commentary on Anaximenes in FGrHist.Anaximenes was hostile to Theopompus, whom he sought to discredit with a libelous parody, Trikaranos, published in Theopompus' style and under his name, attacking Athens, Sparta, and Thebes.J.P. Mahaffy, The Prose Writers from Isocrates to Aristotle, London, 1904, pp. 38-41.Plutarch criticizes Anaximenes, together with Theopompus and Ephorus, for the "rhetorical effects and grand periods" these historians implausibly gave to men in the midst of urgent battlefield circumstances (Praecepta gerendae reipublicae 803b).
Notes{{reflist}}
References

{{Cite EB1911}}
{{SmithDGRBM}}


Editions and translations

Art of Rhetoric
edited by Immanuel Bekker, Oxford 1837 (online)
edited by Leonhard von Spengel, with commentary in Latin, Leipzig, 1847 (online)
edited by Manfred Fuhrmann, Bibliotheca Teubneriana, Leipzig, 1966, 2nd ed. 2000, ISBN 3598719833
edited by Pierre Chiron, Collection Budé, with French translation, Paris, 2002, ISBN 225100498X
anonymous translation, London, 1686 (online)
translated by E.S. Forster, Oxford, 1924 (online, beginning on p. 231 of the PDF file)
Fragments
Karl Müller, appendix to 1846 Didot edition of Arrian, Anabasis et Indica (online)
Felix Jacoby, Die Fragmente der griechischen Historiker, no. 72, with commentary in German
Ludwig Radermacher, Artium Scriptores, Vienna, 1951, pp. 200–202 (rhetorical fragments only, adding Philodemus&#39; Rhetorica, which accounts for three of the nine fragments printed)

{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Anaximenes Of Lampsacus}}









ca:Anaxímenes de Làmpsac
de:Anaximenes von Lampsakos
es:Anaxímenes de Lámpsaco
fr:Anaximène de Lampsaque
is:Anaxímenes frá Lampsakos
it:Anassimene di Lampsaco
la:Anaximenes Lampsacenus
pl:Anaksymenes z Lampsakos
sh:Anaksimen iz Lampsaka
fi:Anaksimenes Lampsakoslainen
tr:Anaksimenes (Lampsakoslu)