title{{Refimprove}}{{histphil}}
This page lists some links to ancient philosophy. In Western philosophy, the spread of Christianity through the Roman Empire marked the ending of Hellenistic philosophy and ushered in the beginnings of Medieval philosophy, whereas in Eastern philosophy, the spread of Islam through the Arab Empire marked the end of Old Iranian philosophy and ushered in the beginnings of early Islamic philosophy.
Ancient Chinese philosophy{{Main}}
Chinese philosophy is the dominant philosophical thought in China and other countries within the sinosphere, including Japan, Korea, and Vietnam.
Schools of thought
Hundred Schools of Thought{{main}}
The Hundred Schools of Thought were philosophers and schools that flourished from 770 to 221 BC, an era of great cultural and intellectual expansion in China. Even though this period - known in its earlier part as the Spring and Autumn period and the Warring States period - in its latter part was fraught with chaos and bloody battles, it is also known as the Golden Age of Chinese philosophy because a broad range of thoughts and ideas were developed and discussed freely. The thoughts and ideas discussed and refined during this period have profoundly influenced lifestyles and social consciousness up to the present day in East Asian countries. The intellectual society of this era was characterized by itinerant scholars, who were often employed by various state rulers as advisers on the methods of government, war, and diplomacy. This period ended with the rise of the Qin Dynasty and the subsequent purge of dissent. The Book of Han lists ten major schools, they are:

Confucianism, which teaches that human beings are teachable, improvable and perfectible through personal and communal endeavour especially including self-cultivation and self-creation. A main idea of Confucianism is the cultivation of virtue and the development of moral perfection. Confucianism holds that one should give up one&#39;s life, if necessary, either passively or actively, for the sake of upholding the cardinal moral values of ren and yi.{{citation}}
Legalism, which maintained that human nature was incorrigibly selfish; accordingly, the only way to preserve the social order was to impose discipline from above, and to see to a strict enforcement of laws. The Legalists exalted the state above all, seeking its prosperity and martial prowess over the welfare of the common people.
Taoism, a philosophy which emphasizes the Three Jewels of the Tao: compassion, moderation, and humility, while Taoist thought generally focuses on nature, the relationship between humanity and the cosmos; health and longevity; and wu wei (action through inaction). Harmony with the Universe, or the source thereof (Tao), is the intended result of many Taoist rules and practices.
Mohism, which advocated the idea of universal love: Mozi believed that &#34;everyone is equal before heaven&#34;, and that people should seek to imitate heaven by engaging in the practice of collective love. His epistemology can be regarded as primitive materialist empiricism; he believed that human cognition ought to be based on one&#39;s perceptions – one&#39;s sensory experiences, such as sight and hearing – instead of imagination or internal logic, elements founded on the human capacity for abstraction. Mozi advocated frugality, condemning the Confucian emphasis on ritual and music, which he denounced as extravagant.
Naturalism, the School of Naturalists or the Yin-yang school, which synthesized the concepts of yin-yang and the Five Elements;  Zou Yan is considered the founder of this school.{{cite web}}
Agrarianism, or the School of Agrarianism, which advocated peasant utopian communalism and egalitarianism.{{cite book}} The Agrarians believed that Chinese society should be modeled around that of the early sage king Shen Nong, a folk hero which was portrayed in Chinese literature as &#34;working in the fields, along with everyone else, and consulting with everyone else when any decision had to be reached.&#34;
The Logicians or the School of Names, which focused on definition and logic. It is said to have parallels with that of the Ancient Greek sophists or dialecticians. The most notable Logician was Gongsun Longzi.
The School of Diplomacy or School of Vertical and Horizontal [Alliances], which focused on practical matters instead of any moral principle, so it stressed political and diplomatic tactics, and debate and lobbying skill. Scholars from this school were good orators, debaters and tacticians.
The Miscellaneous School, which integrated teachings from different schools; for instance, Lü Buwei found scholars from different schools to write a book called Lüshi Chunqiu cooperatively. This school tried to integrate the merits of various schools and avoid their perceived flaws.
The School of &#34;Minor-talks&#34;, which was not a unique school of thought, but a philosophy constructed of all the thoughts which were discussed by and originated from normal people on the street.
Another group is the School of the Military that studied strategy and the philosophy of war; Sunzi and Sun Bin were influential leaders. However, this school was not one of the &#34;Ten Schools&#34; defined by Hanshu.


Early Imperial ChinaThe founder of the Qin Dynasty, who implemented Legalism as the official philosophy, quashed Mohist and Confucianist schools. Legalism remained influential until the emperors of the Han Dynasty adopted Daoism and later Confucianism as official doctrine. These latter two became the determining forces of Chinese thought until the introduction of Buddhism.Confucianism was particularly strong during the Han Dynasty, whose greatest thinker was Dong Zhongshu, who integrated Confucianism with the thoughts of the Zhongshu School and the theory of the Five Elements. He also was a promoter of the New Text school, which considered Confucius as a divine figure and a spiritual ruler of China, who foresaw and started the evolution of the world towards the Universal Peace. In contrast, there was an Old Text school that advocated the use of Confucian works written in ancient language (from this comes the denomination Old Text) that were so much more reliable. In particular, they refuted the assumption of Confucius as a godlike figure and considered him as the greatest sage, but simply a human and mortalThe 3rd and 4th centuries saw the rise of the Xuanxue (mysterious learning), also called Neo-Taoism. The most important philosophers of this movement were Wang Bi, Xiang Xiu and Guo Xiang. The main question of this school was whether Being came before Not-Being (in Chinese, ming and wuming). A peculiar feature of these Taoist thinkers, like the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove, was the concept of feng liu (lit. wind and flow), a sort of romantic spirit which encouraged following the natural and instinctive impulse.Buddhism arrived in China around the 1st century AD, but it was not until the Northern and Southern, Sui and Tang Dynasties that it gained considerable influence and acknowledgement. At the beginning, it was considered a sort of Taoist sect, and there was even a theory about Laozi, founder of Taoism, who went to India and taught his philosophy to Buddha. Mahayana Buddhism was far more successful in China than its rival Hinayana, and both Indian schools and local Chinese sects arose from the 5th century. Two chiefly important monk philosophers were Sengzhao and Daosheng. But probably the most influential and original of these schools was the Chan sect, which had an even stronger impact in Japan as the Zen sect.
Philosophers

Taoism
Laozi
Zhuangzi
Zhang Daoling
Zhang Jue
Ge Hong
Chen Tuan
Confucianism
Confucius
Mencius
Xun Zi
Legalism
Li Si
Li Kui
Han Fei
Shang Yang
Shen Buhai
Shen Dao
Mohism
Mozi
Song Xing
Logicians
Deng Xi
Hui Shi
Gongsun Long
Agrarianism
Xu Xing
Naturalism
Zou Yan
Neotaoism
Wang Bi
Guo Xiang
Xiang Xiu
School of Diplomacy
Guiguzi
Su Qin
Zhang Yi
Yue Yi
Li Yiji
School of the Military
Sunzi
Sun Bin
Zen
Linji
Tung-shan
Yunmen Wenyan


Ancient Greek philosophy{{Main}}


Philosophers
Presocratic philosophers


Milesian School
Thales (624 BC–ca. 546 BC)
Anaximander (610-546 BC)
Anaximenes of Miletus (c. 585-c. 525 BC)



Pythagoreans
Pythagoras (582-496 BC)
Philolaus (470-380 BC)
Alcmaeon of Croton
Archytas (428-347 BC)



Heraclitus (535-475 BC)



Eleatic School
Xenophanes (570-470 BC)
Parmenides (510-440 BC)
Zeno of Elea (490-430 BC)
Melissus of Samos (c 470 BC–unknown)



Pluralists
Empedocles (490-430 BC)
Anaxagoras (500-428 BC)



Atomists
Leucippus (first half of 5th century BC)
Democritus (460-370 BC)
Metrodorus of Chios (4th century BC)



Pherecydes of Syros (6th century BC)



Sophists
Protagoras (490-420 BC)
Gorgias (487-376 BC)
Antiphon (480-411 BC)
Prodicus (465/450-after 399 BC)
Hippias (middle of the 5th century BC)
Thrasymachus (459-400 BC)
Callicles
Critias
Lycophron



Diogenes of Apollonia (c. 460 BC-unknown)


Classical Greek philosophers

Socrates (469-399 BC)
Euclid of Megara (450-380 BC)
Antisthenes (445-360 BC)
Aristippus (435-356 BC)
Plato (428-347 BC)
Speusippus (407-339 BC)
Diogenes of Sinope (400-325 BC)
Xenocrates (396-314 BC)
Aristotle (384-322 BC)
Stilpo (380-300 BC)
Theophrastus (370-288 BC)


Hellenistic philosophy

Pyrrho (365-275 BC)
Epicurus (341-270 BC), see: Epicureanism
Metrodorus of Lampsacus (the younger) (331–278 BC)
Zeno of Citium (333-263 BC)
Cleanthes (331-232 BC)
Timon (320-230 BC)
Arcesilaus (316-232 BC)
Menippus (3rd century BC)
Archimedes (c. 287-212 BC)
Chrysippus (280-207 BC)
Carneades (214-129 BC)
Clitomachus (187-109 BC)
Metrodorus of Stratonicea (late 2nd century BC)
Philo of Larissa (160-80 BC)
Posidonius (135-51 BC)
Antiochus of Ascalon (130-68 BC)
Aenesidemus (1st century BC)
Philo of Alexandria (30 BC–45 AD)
Agrippa (1st century AD)


Hellenistic schools of thought

Cynicism
Eclecticism
Epicureanism
Neo-Platonism
Peripatetic School
Skepticism
Stoicism
Sophism


Ancient Indian philosophy{{Main}}
The ancient Indian philosophy is a fusion of two ancient traditions : Sramana tradition and Vedic tradition.
Vedic philosophy
Indian philosophy begins with the Vedas where questions related to laws of nature, the origin of the universe and the place of man in it are asked. In the famous Rigvedic Hymn of Creation the poet says:"Whence all creation had its origin,
he, whether he fashioned it or whether he did not,
he, who surveys it all from highest heaven,
he knows--or maybe even he does not know."In the Vedic view, creation is ascribed to the self-consciousness of the primeval being (Purusha). This leads to the inquiry into the one being that underlies the diversity of empirical phenomena and the origin of all things.  Cosmic order is termed rta and causal law by karma. Nature (prakriti) is taken to have three qualities (sattva, rajas, and tamas).

Vedas
Upanishads
Hindu philosophy


Sramana Philosophy{{Main}}
Jainism and Buddhism are continuation of the Sramana school of thought. The Sramanas cultivated a pessimistic worldview of the samsara as full of suffering and advocated renunciation and austerities. They laid stress on philosophical concepts like Ahimsa, Karma, Jnana, Samsara and Moksa.
Classical Indian philosophyIn classical times, these inquiries were systematized in six schools of philosophy. Some of the questions asked were:

What is the ontological nature of consciousness?
How is cognition itself experienced?
Is mind (chit) intentional or not?
Does cognition have its own structure?

The Six schools of Indian philosophy are:

Nyaya
Vaisheshika
Samkhya
Yoga
Mimamsa (Purva Mimamsa)
Vedanta (Uttara Mimamsa)

Other traditions of Indian philosophy include:

Hindu philosophy
Buddhist philosophy
Jain philosophy
Sikh philosophy
C?rv?ka (atheist) philosophy


Buddhism

Buddha, Buddhist philosophy
{{Buddhist traditions timeline}}
C?rv?kaC?rv?ka (Sanskrit: ???????), also known as Lok?yata, is a system of Hindu philosophy that assumes various forms of philosophical skepticism and religious indifference.It is named after its founder, C?rv?ka, author of the B?rhaspatya-s?tras.
In overviews of Hindu philosophy, C?rv?ka is classified as a "faithless" (n?stika) system, the same classification as is given to Buddhism and Jainism.It is characterized as a materialistic and atheistic school of thought. While this branch of Indian philosophy is not considered to be part of the six orthodox schools of Hindu philosophy, it is noteworthy as evidence of a materialistic movement within Hinduism.
The C?rv?ka school of philosophy had a variety of atheistic, materialistic, and naturalistic beliefs.
The Carvaka believed there was no afterlife, no life after death       Springing forth from these elements itself
       solid knowledge is destroyed
       when they are destroyed—
       after death no intelligence remains.Naturalism
The Carvaka believed in a form of naturalism, that is that all things happen by nature, and come from nature (not from any deity or Supreme Being).       Fire is hot, water cold,
       refreshingly cool is the breeze of morning;
       By whom came this variety?
       They were born of their own nature.

Sensual indulgenceUnlike many of the Indian philosophies of the time, the Carvaka believed there was nothing wrong with sensual indulgence, and that it was the only enjoyment to be pursued.       That the pleasure arising to man
       from contact with sensible objects,
       is to be relinquished because accompanied by pain—
       such is the reasoning of fools.
       The kernels of the paddy, rich with finest white grains,
       What man, seeking his own true interest,
       would fling them away
       because of a covering of husk and dust?
       While life remains, let a man live happily,
       let him feed on butter though he runs in debt;
       When once the body becomes ashes,
       how can it ever return again?

Religion is invented by man
The Carvaka believed that religion was invented and made up by men, having no divine authority.       The three authors of the Vedas were buffoons, knaves, and demons.
       All the well-known formulae of the pandits, jarphari, turphari, etc.
       and all the obscene rites for the queen commanded in Aswamedha,
       these were invented by buffoons, and so all the various kinds of presents to the priests,
       while the eating of flesh was similarly commanded by night-prowling demons.

Ancient Indian philosophers

Asanga (c. 300), exponent of the Yogacara
Bhartrihari (c 450–510 AD), early figure in Indic linguistic theory
Bodhidharma (c. 440–528 AD), founder of the Zen school of Buddhism
Chanakya (c.350 - c.275 BC), author of Arthashastra, professor (acharya) of political science at the Takshashila University
Dign?ga (c. 500), one of the founders of Buddhist school of Indian logic.
Gautama Buddha (563 BC - 483 BC), founder of Buddhist school of thought
Gotama (c. 2nd–3rd century AD), wrote the Nyaya Sutras, considered to be the foundation of the Nyaya school.
Haribhadra (8th Century CE), a Jaina thinker, author and great proponent of anek?ntav?da and classical yoga, as a soteriological system of meditation in Jaina context. His works include {{IAST}} and Yogabindu.
Hemacandra (1089–1172 CE) - a Jaina thinker, author, historian, grammarian and logician. His works include Yoga??stra and Trishashthishalakapurushacharitra.
Jaimini, author of Purva Mimamsa Sutras
Kanada (c. 600 BC), founded the philosophical school of Vaisheshika, gave theory of atomism
Kapila (c. 500 BC), proponent of the Samkhya system of philosophy
Kundakunda (2nd Century CE), exponent of Jain mysticism and Jain nayas dealing with the nature of the soul and its contamination by matter, author of Pañc?stik?yas?ra (Essence of the Five Existents), the Pravacanas?ra (Essence of the Scripture) and the Samayas?ra (Essence of the Doctrine)
Lonk? (15th century CE) – His opposition to idol worship and rituals eventually led to establishment of non-iconic sects of Sthanakvasi and Terapanthi.
Nagarjuna (c. 150 - 250 AD), the founder of the Madhyamaka (Middle Path) school of Mah?y?na Buddhism.
P??ini (520–460 BC), grammarian, author of Ashtadhyayi
Patañjali (between 200 BC and 400 AD), developed the philosophy of Raja Yoga in his Yoga Sutras.
Pingala (c. 500 BC), author of the Chandas shastra
Adi Shankara (788-820 AD), the first philosopher to consolidate the doctrine of Advaita Vedanta, a sub-school of Vedanta
Siddhasena Div?kara (5th Century CE), Jain logician and author of important works in Sanskrit and Prakrit, such as, Ny?y?vat?ra (on Logic) and Sanmatis?tra (dealing with the seven Jaina standpoints, knowledge and the objects of knowledge)
Syntipas (c. 100 BC), author of The Story of the Seven Wise Masters.
Tiruvalluvar (between 100 BC and 300 AD), author of Thirukkural, one of the greatest ethical works in Tamil language
Um?sv?ti or Umasvami (2nd Century CE), author of first Jain work in Sanskrit, Tattv?rthas?tra, expounding the Jain philosophy in a most systematized form acceptable to all sects of Jainism.
Vasubandhu (c. 300 AD), one of the main founders of the Indian Yogacara school.
Vyasa (c. 3000 BC), author of several important works in Hindu philosophy
Yajnavalkya (Prehistoric), linked to philosophical teachings of the Brhadaranyaka Upanishad, and the apophatic teaching of &#39;neti neti&#39; etc.
Ya?ovijaya Ga?i (1624–88 CE) – Jain logician and considered last intellectual giant to contribute to Jaina philosophy.


Ancient Iranian philosophy 
{{Main}}
See also: Dualism, Dualism (philosophy of mind)While there are ancient relations between the Indian Vedas and the Iranian Avesta, the two main families of the Indo-Iranian philosophical traditions were characterized by fundamental differences in their implications for the human being's position in society and their view on the role of man in the universe. The first charter of human rights by Cyrus the Great as understood in the Cyrus cylinder is often seen as a reflection of the questions and thoughts expressed by Zarathustra and developed in Zoroastrian schools of thought of the Achaemenid Era of Iranian history.Philip G. Kreyenbroek: "Morals and Society in Zoroastrian Philosophy" in "Persian Philosophy". Companion Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy: Brian Carr and Indira Mahalingam. Routledge, 2009.Mary Boyce: "The Origins of Zoroastrian Philosophy" in "Persian Philosophy". Companion Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy: Brian Carr and Indira Mahalingam. Routledge, 2009.
Schools of thought

Zoroastrianism
Zarathustra
Jamasp
Ostanes
Mardan-Farrux Ohrmazddadan
Adurfarnbag Farroxzadan
Adurbad Emedan
Azar Kayvan
Avesta
Gathas
Mazdakism
Mazdak
Mazdak the Elder
Manichaeism
Mani
Zurvanism
Aesthetic Zurvanism
Materialist Zurvanism
Fatalistic Zurvanism
Other ancient philosophers
Anacharsis


Philosophy and the Empire

Political Philosophy
Tansar
University of Gundishapur
Borzouye
Bakhtshooa Gondishapuri
Emperor Khosrau's philosophical discourses
Paul the Persian


Literature

Pahlavi literature


Continuation in Iranian philosophy

Persian Illuminationism
Suhrawardi
School of Isfahan
Mir Damad
Transcendent Philosophy
Sadr Shirazi


In Western literature and cultureIn addition to many remarkable reflections in Ancient and Medieval European literature, such as those related to Zoroastrian and Manichaean ideas and challenges, in recent Western literature Iranian philosophy appears and is treated in various ways. Two eminent examples are:

Thus Spoke Zarathustra by the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche
Creation by the American thinker Gore Vidal 


Early Roman and Christian philosophySee also:  Jewish philosophy, Christian philosophy
Philosophers during Roman times

Cicero (106-43 BC)
Lucretius (94-55 BC)
Seneca (4 BC–65 AD)
Paul of Tarsus (c. 6BC-c. 67AD)
Musonius Rufus (30 AD–100 AD)
Plutarch (45-120 AD)
Epictetus (55-135 AD)
Marcus Aurelius (121-180 AD)
Clement of Alexandria (150-215 AD)
Alcinous (philosopher) (2nd century AD)
Sextus Empiricus (3rd century AD)
Alexander of Aphrodisias (3rd century AD)
Ammonius Saccas (3rd century AD)
 Plotinus (205-270 AD)
Porphyry (232-304 AD)
Iamblichus (242-327 AD)
Themistius (317-388 AD)
Augustine of Hippo (354-430 AD)
Proclus (411-485 AD)
Philoponus of Alexandria (490-570 AD)
Damascius (462-540 AD)
Boethius (472-524 AD)
Simplicius of Cilicia (490-560 AD)


References{{reflist}}
External links

Internet sources

{{Philosophy topics}}{{Use dmy dates}}{{DEFAULTSORT:Ancient Philosophy}}


{{Link GA}}
{{Link FA}}
{{Link FA}}ar:????? ?????
az:Antik f?ls?f?
bg:??????? ?????????
ca:Filosofia antiga
cs:Starov?ká filosofie
de:Philosophie der Antike
fa:????? ????? ??????
fr:Philosophie antique
ko:?? ??
hy:??????? ????????????????
hr:Anti?ka filozofija
is:Fornaldarheimspeki
it:Filosofia antica
nl:Antieke filosofie
no:Antikkens filosofi
pl:Filozofia staro?ytna
pt:Filosofia antiga
ro:Filosofia antic? greco-roman?
ru:???????? ?????????
scn:Filusufìa antica
sk:Staroveká filozofia
sr:??????? ??????????
sh:Anti?ka filozofija
fi:Antiikin filosofia
sv:Antikens filosofi
th:????????????????????
tr:Antik Ça? felsefesi
uk:??????? ?????????
zh:????