title{{Infobox islands}}
The Andaman Islands (Hindi: ??????? ????? ????) are a group of Indian Ocean archipelagic islands in the Bay of Bengal, between India to the west and Burma to the north and east. Most of the islands are part of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands Union Territory of India, while a small number in the north of the archipelago belong to Burma.
History
The name "Andaman" first appears in the work of Arab geographers of the ninth century (Soleyman in 851),{{Citation needed}}, though it is uncertain whether ancient geographers like Ptolemy also knew of the Andamans but referred to them by a different name. They were also described as being inhabited by fierce cannibalistic tribes by the Persian navigator Buzurg ibn Shahriyar of Ramhormuz in his tenth century book Ajaib al-Hind (The wonders of India), in which he also mentioned an island he called Andaman al-Kabir (Great Andaman).{{Citation}}{{Citation}} During the Chola Dynasty period in South India (800-1200AD), which ruled an empire encompassing southeastern peninsular India, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the Maldives, and large parts of current day Sri Lanka, Indonesia and Malaysia,{{Citation}} the island group was referred to as Timaittivu (or impure islands).{{Citation}} Marco Polo briefly mentions the Andamans (calling them by the name "Angamanain"), though it is uncertain whether he visited the islands, or whether he met the natives if he did, as he describes them as having heads like dogs.{{Citation}}{{Citation}} His remark about their features may be the second-hand account of a local resident or fellow traveler, which is a frequent cause for certain exaggerated descriptions in Marco Polo's travels. Another Italian traveler, Niccolò de' Conti (c. 1440), mentioned the islands and said that the name means "Island of Gold". A theory that became prevalent in the late nineteenth century, and has since gained momentum, is that the name of the islands derives from the Sanskrit language, by way of Malay, and refers to the deity, Hanuman.{{Citation}} In the Age of Exploration, travelers often noted the "ferocious hostility" of the Andamanese.The Maratha admiral Kanhoji Angre used the Andamans as a base and "fought the British off these islands until his death in 1729." {{Citation}}{{Citation}}
British Occupation and Penal ColonyIn 1789, the government of Bengal established a naval base and penal colony on Chatham Island in the southeast bay of Great Andaman. The settlement is now known as Port Blair (after the Bombay Marine lieutenant Archibald Blair who founded it).  After two years, the colony was moved to the northeast part of Great Andaman and was named Port Cornwallis after Admiral William Cornwallis.  However, there was much disease and death in the penal colony and the government ceased operating it in May 1796.In 1824, Port Cornwallis was the rendezvous of the fleet carrying the army to the First Burmese War. In the 1830s and 1840s, shipwrecked crews who landed on the Andamans were often attacked and killed by the natives, alarming the British government.  In 1855, the government proposed another settlement on the islands, including a convict establishment, but the Indian Rebellion of 1857 forced a delay in its construction.  However, since the rebellion gave the British so many prisoners, it made the new Andaman settlement and prison an urgent necessity.  Construction began in November 1857 at Port Blair using inmates' labor, avoiding the vicinity of a salt swamp that seemed to have been the source of many of the earlier problems at Port Cornwallis.In 1867, the ship Nineveh wrecked on the reef of North Sentinel Island. The 86 survivors reached the beach in the ship's boats. On the third day, they were attacked with iron-tipped spears by naked islanders. One person from the ship escaped in a boat.{{cite news}}For some time sickness and mortality were high, but swamp reclamation and extensive forest clearance continued. The Andaman colony acquired notoriety following the murder of the Viceroy Richard Southwell Bourke, 6th Earl of Mayo, on a visit to the settlement (8 February 1872) by a Muslim convict, a Pathan from Afghanistan, Sher Ali. In the same year the two island groups, Andaman and Nicobar, were united under a chief commissioner residing at Port Blair.{{quotation}}The above accounts, written while Britain still occupied India, may leave the impression that these settlements were a model of progressive penal reform. Indian accounts, however, paint a different picture. From the time of its development in 1858 under the direction of James Pattison Walker, and in response to the mutiny and rebellion of the previous year, the settlement was first and foremost a repository for political prisoners. The Cellular Jail at Port Blair when completed in 1910 included 698 cells designed for solitary confinement; each cell measured {{convert}} by {{convert}} with a single ventilation window {{convert}} above the floor. Vinayak Damodar Savarkar was one of the notable prisoners there.There was a prison here in the 10th century. The Indians imprisoned here referred to the Island and its prison as  "Kala Pani" (Black water){{cite web}} (See also movie by the same name, which deals with some of these events Kalapani{{cite web}}). While the exact number of prisoners who died in this camp is not fully known, it is estimated they number in the thousands (some of the names of the political prisoners who perished can be found here {{cite web}} - this list is predominantly of those from eastern India and is incomplete). Many more died of harsh treatment, as well as through the harsh living and working conditions, in this camp.{{cite news}}The Viper Chain Gang Jail on Viper Island was reserved for troublemakers, and was also the site of hangings. In the 20th century it became a convenient place to house prominent members of India's independence movement.
Japanese occupationThe Andaman and Nicobar islands were later occupied by Japan during World War II.{{cite web}} The islands were nominally put under the authority of the Arzi Hukumat-e-Azad Hind (Provisional Government of Free India) headed by Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose. Netaji visited the islands during the war, and renamed them as Shaheed (Martyr) & Swaraj (Self-rule). On December 30, 1943, during the Japanese occupation, Subhas Chandra Bose, who was controversially  allied with the Japanese, first raised the flag of Indian independence.  General Loganathan, of the Indian National Army, was Governor of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, which had been annexed to the Provisional Government. Before leaving the islands, the Japanese rounded up and executed 750 civilians.Werner Gruhl, Imperial Japan's World War Two, 1931–1945, Transaction Publishers, 2007 ISBN 978-0-7658-0352-8 After the end of the war the islands briefly returned to British control, before becoming part of the newly independent state of India.

At the close of the Second World War the British government announced its intention to abolish the penal settlement. The government proposed to employ former inmates in an initiative to develop the island's fisheries, timber, and agricultural resources. In exchange inmates would be granted return passage to the Indian mainland, or the right to settle on the islands. The penal colony was eventually closed on August 15, 1947 when India gained its independence. It has since served as a museum to the independence movement.
Recent historyIn 1974, a film crew and anthropologist Trilokinath Pandit attempted friendly contact by leaving a tethered pig, some pots and pans, some fruit and toys on the beach at North Sentinel Island. One of the islanders shot the film director in the thigh with an arrow. The following year, European visitors were repulsed with arrows.Pandit{{cite news}}On August 2, 1981, the ship Primrose grounded on the North Sentinel Island reef. A few days later, crewmen on the immobile vessel observed small black men were carrying spears and arrows and building boats on the beach. The captain of the Primrose radioed for an urgent airdrop of firearms so the crew could defend themselves, but did not receive them. Heavy seas kept the islanders away from the ship. After a week, the crew were rescued by an Indian navy helicopter.On January 4, 1991, Pandit made the first known friendly contact with the Sentinelese.Until 1996, the Jarawa met all visitors with flying arrows.{{Clarify}} From time to time they attacked and killed poachers on the lands reserved to them by the Indian government. They also killed some workers building the Andaman Trunk Road (ATR), which traverses Jarawa lands. The first peaceful contact with the Jarawa occurred in 1996. Settlers found a teenage Jarawa boy named Emmei near Kadamtala town. The boy was immobilized with a broken foot. They took Emmei to a hospital where he received good care. Over several weeks, Emmei learned a few words of Hindi before returning to his jungle home. The following year, Jarawa individuals and small groups began appearing along roadsides and occasionally venturing into settlements to steal food. The ATR may have interfered with traditional Jarawa food sources.Sekhsaria{{cite news}}SurvivalIn April 1998, American photographer John S Callahan organized the first surfing project in the Andamans, starting from Phuket in Thailand with the assistance of Southeast Asia Liveaboards (SEAL), a UK owned dive charter company. With a crew of international professional surfers, they crossed the Andaman Sea on the yacht Crescent and cleared formalities in Port Blair. The group proceeded to Little Andaman Island, where they spent ten days surfing several spots for the first time, including Jarawa Point near Hut Bay, and the long right reef point at the southwest tip of the island, named Kumari Point. The resulting article in SURFER Magazine, "Quest for Fire" by journalist Sam George, put the Andaman Islands on the surfing map for the first time.{{cite web}} Footage of the waves of the Andaman Islands also appeared in the film "Thicker than Water", shot by cinematographer Jack Johnson, who later achieved worldwide fame as a popular musician. Callahan went on to make several more surfing projects in the Andamans, including a trip to the Nicobar Islands in 1999.On 26 December 2004 the coast of the Andaman Islands was devastated by a {{convert}} high tsunami following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. On 11 August 2009 a magnitude 7 earthquake struck near the Andaman Islands, causing a tsunami warning to go into effect. On 30 March 2010 a magnitude 6.9 earthquake struck near the Andaman Islands.Boa Sr., the last speaker of the ancient language Bo, died on January 28, 2010, at the age of 85.{{cite news}}
GeographyThe Andaman Archipelago is an oceanic continuation of the Burmese Arakan Yoma range in the North and of the Indonesian Archipelago in the South. It includes some two hundred islands in the Bay of Bengal, with the Andaman Sea to the east between the islands and the coast of Burma. North Andaman Island is {{convert}} south of Burma, although a few smaller islands including the three Coco Islands, which belong to Burma are further north, while at the southern end of the archipelago, the Ten Degree Channel separates the Andamans from the Nicobar Islands to the south. The highest point in the Andamans is Saddle Peak ({{convert}}).The  natural vegetation of the Andamans is tropical forest with mangroves on the coast. Most of the forests are evergreen but there are areas of deciduous forest on North Andaman, Middle Andaman, Baratang and parts of South Andaman Island. The rainforests of the islands are similar in composition to those of the west coast of Burma and are largely unspoilt despite logging and the demands of the fast-growing population driven by immigration from the Indian mainland. There are protected areas on Little Andaman, Narcondam, North Andaman and South Andaman but these are mainly aimed at preserving the coast and the marine wildlife rather than the rainforests.{{cite web}} Threats to wildlife come from introduced species including rats, dogs, cats and the elephants of Interview Island and North Andaman.
ClimateThe climate is typical of tropical islands of similar latitude. It is always warm, but with sea-breezes. Rainfall is irregular, but usually dry during the north-east, and very wet during the south-west, monsoons.
FaunaThe islands are home to a number of endemic species and more that live only here and on the Nicobar Islands to the south. Mammals endemic to the Andaman Islands include three white-toothed shrews: Andaman Spiny Shrew Crocidura hispida, Andaman White-toothed Shrew Crocidura andamanensis, and Jenkins' Shrew Crocidura jenkinsi. Also living on the islands, the Andaman Horseshoe Bat (rhinolophus cognatus), the Andaman Rat (rattus stoicus) and the South Andaman krait (Bungarus andamanensis). Endemic or near endemic birds include a serpent-eagle Spilornis elgini, a crake Rallina canningi, a wood-pigeon Columba palumboides, a cuckoo dove Macropygia rufipennis, a coucal Centropus andamanensis, a Scops Owl Otus balli, a hawk-owl Ninox affinis, the Narcondam Hornbill (Aceros narcondami),  a woodpecker Dryocopus hodgei, a drongo Dicrurus andamanensis, a treepie Dendrocitta bayleyi and the White-headed Starling (sturnus erythropygius). The islands also have a number of endemic reptiles, toads and frogs. There is a sanctuary 45 miles from Havelock island for saltwater crocodiles. Over the past 25 years there have been 24 crocodile attacks with 4 fatalities, including the death of American tourist Lauren Failla. The government has been criticized for failing to inform tourists of the crocodile santuary and danger, while simultaneously promoting tourism.{{cite web}}
Demographics{{Main}}
For information on the indigenous languages, see Andamanese languages
The population of the Andamans was 356,000 in 2010,http://india.gov.in/knowindia/ut_andaman.php{{dead link}} having grown from 50,000 in 1960. Of the people who live in the Andaman Islands, a small minority of about 1,000 are indigenous Adivasis of the Andamans. The rest are mainly divided between Bengali, Hindi and Tamil people from the mainland.{{cite web}}The Andamanese is a collective term to describe the peoples who are the aboriginal inhabitants of the Andaman Islands and Nicobar Islands, located in the Bay of Bengal. The term includes the Great Andamanese, Jarawa, Onge, Shompen, Sentinelese and the extinct Jangil.  The Great Andamanese, who now number just 52, were originally 10 distinct tribes, 5,000-strong when the British colonised the Andaman Islands.Anosh Malekar, "The case for a linguisitic survey," Infochange Media, August 1, 2011. Most were killed or died of diseases brought by the colonisers. Most of the Great Andamanese tribes have forgotten their mother tongues and speak in Hindi now. Anthropologically they are usually classified as Negritos, represented also by the Semang of Malaysia and the Aeta of the Philippines.

The Andamans are theorized to be a key stepping stone in a great coastal migration of humans from Africa via the Arabian peninsula, along the coastal regions of the Indian mainland and towards Southeast Asia, Japan and Oceania.{{Citation}} Genetic analysis indicates that male Onges and Jarawas almost exclusively belong to Haplotype D, which is also found in Tibet and Japan, but is rare on the Indian mainland and elsewhere in Asia.{{cite web}} However, this is a subclade of the D haplogroup which has not been seen outside of the Andamans, which marks the insularity of these tribes.{{Citation}} The only other group that is known to predominantly belong to haplogroup D are the Ainu aboriginal people of Japan.{{Citation}} Male Great Andamanese, unlike the Onge and the Jarawa, have a mixed presence of Y-chromosome haplogroups O, L, K and P, which places them between mainland Indian and Asian populations.The mtDNA distribution, which indicates maternal descent, describes all the Onge and a heavy majority of the Great Andamanese as belonging to haplogroup M, found ubiquitously in India, where it represents 60% of all maternal lineages.Revathi Rajkumar et al., Phylogeny and antiquity of M macrohaplogroup inferred from complete mt DNA sequence of Indian specific lineages, BMC Evolutionary Biology 2005, 5:26 doi:10.1186/1471-2148-5-26 Given the insularity of the Andamanese, this has led geneticists to believe that this haplogroup originated with the earliest settlers of India during the coastal migration that brought the ancestors of the Andamanese to the Indian mainland, the Andaman Islands and further afield to Southeast Asia.{{Citation}} Some anthropologists postulate that Southern India and Southeast Asia was once populated largely by Negritos similar to those of the Andamans, and that some tribal populations in the south of India, such as the Irulas are remnants of that period.{{Citation}}{{Citation}}
GovernmentPort Blair is the chief community on the islands, and the administrative centre of the Union Territory. The Andaman Islands form a single administrative district within the Union Territory, the Andaman district (the Nicobar Islands were separated and established as the new Nicobar district in 1974).
Cultural referencesThe islands are prominently featured in Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes mystery, The Sign of the Four, as well as in M.M. Kaye's "Death in the Andamans."  The magistrate in Lady Gregory's play Spreading the News had formerly served in the islands.  A principal character in the book "Six Suspects" (ISBN 0-385-60815-2) by Vikas Swarup is from the Andaman Islands. Kalapani (Malayalam) and Sirai Chaalai (Tamil), a 1996 Indian film by Priyadarshan, depicts on freedom struggle and briefs on the lives of prisoners in Andaman Islands.
Infrastructure
AirportsThe only airport is the islands is Vir Savarkar Airport in Port Blair, which has scheduled services to Kolkata and Chennai.  The airport is under control of the Indian Navy. Daytime flying is allowed.Due to the length of these routes and the small number of airlines flying to the islands, fares have traditionally been relatively expensive, although cheaper for locals than visitors. Fares are high during peak seasons of spring and winter, but fares have been decreased over the time due to large expansion of  aviation industry in India.
See also

Nicobar Islands
Endemic birds of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands
List of trees of the Andaman Islands


Notes{{Reflist}}
References

{{1911}}



History &#38; Culture. The Andaman Islands with destination quide. http://www.andamantravelagent.com/about-andaman



India Home Department. The Andaman Islands: with notes on Barren Island.  C.B. Lewis, Baptist Mission Press, 1859 read online or download


External links

Andaman Tourism Site
Beaches & Historical Monuments in Andaman


External links{{Wiktionary}}
{{Commons category}}

Official Andaman and Nicobar Tourism Website
Andaman District (official site)
Andaman Islands Tourism
Andaman & Nicobar Islands: Tourism Portal
Andaman & Nicobar Islands: Destination Guide




be:??????????? ???????
be-x-old:??????????? ???????
bg:?????????? ???????
da:Andamanerne
de:Andamanen
et:Andamani saared
es:Islas Andamán
eo:Andamanoj
eu:Andaman uharteak
fa:????? ???????
fr:Îles Andaman
fy:Andamanen
ko:??? ??
hi:???????
hr:Andamani
id:Andaman
it:Andamane
kk:??????? ????????
mrj:??????? ??????
lt:Andaman? salos
nl:Andamanen
ja:???????
no:Andamanene
nn:Andamanøyane
pl:Andamany
pt:Ilhas Andamão
ro:Insulele Andaman
ru:??????????? ???????
sr:?????????? ??????
fi:Andamaanit
ta:???????? ???????
uk:??????????? ???????
zh:?????