title{{For}}
{{pp-move-indef}}
{{Infobox scientist}}
Anders Celsius (27 November 1701 &ndash; 25 April 1744) was a Swedish astronomer. He was professor of astronomy at Uppsala University from 1730 to 1744, but traveled from 1732 to 1735 visiting notable observatories in Germany, Italy and France. He founded the Uppsala Astronomical Observatory in 1741, and in 1742 he proposed the Celsius temperature scale which takes his name. The scale was later reversed in 1745 by Carl Linnaeus, one year after Celsius' death.
Biography
Young lifeAnders Celsius was born in Uppsala, Sweden on 27 November 1701. His family originated from Ovanåker in the province of Hälsingland. The family name is a Latin version of the name of the vicarage (Högen).  Anders was raised a Lutheran.As the son of an astronomy professor, Nils Celsius, and the grandson of the mathematician Agnus Celsius and the astronomer Anders Spole, Celsius chose a career in science. He was a talented mathematician from an early age. Anders Celsius studied at Uppsala University, where his father was a teacher, and in 1730 he too, became a professor of astronomy there.
CareerIn 1730, he published the {{lang}} (New Method for Determining the Distance from the Sun to the Earth). His research also involved the study of auroral phenomena, which he conducted with his assistant Olof Hiorter, and he was the first to suggest a connection between the aurora borealis and changes in the magnetic field of the Earth.{{cite web}} He observed the variations of a compass needle and found that larger deflections correlated with stronger auroral activity. At Nuremberg in 1733, he published a collection of 316 observations of the aurora borealis made by himself and others over the period 1716–1732.Encyclopædia Britannica, Retrieved on 24 June 2008Celsius traveled frequently in the early 1730s, including to Germany, Italy, and France, when he visited most of the major European observatories. In Paris he advocated the measurement of an arc of the meridian in Lapland. In 1736, he participated in the expedition organized for that purpose by the French Academy of Sciences, led by the French mathematician Pierre Louis Maupertuis (1698–1759) to measure a degree of latitude. The aim of the expedition was to measure the length of a degree along a meridian, close to the pole, and compare the result with a similar expedition to Peru, today in Ecuador, near the equator. The expeditions confirmed Isaac Newton's belief that the shape of the earth is an ellipsoid flattened at the poles.{{cite web}} 

In 1738, he published the {{lang}} (Observations on Determining the Shape of the Earth). Celsius' participation in the Lapland expedition won him much respect in Sweden with the government and his peers, and played a key role in generating interest from the Swedish authorities in donating the resources required to construct a new modern observatory in Uppsala. He was successful in the request, and Celsius founded the Uppsala Astronomical Observatory in 1741. The observatory was equipped with instruments purchased during his long voyage abroad, comprising the most modern instrumental technology of the period"In astronomy, Celsius began a series of observations using colored glass plates to record the magnitude (a measure of brightness) of certain stars. This was the first attempt to measure the intensity of starlight with a tool other than the human eye. He made observations of eclipses and various astronomical objects and published catalogues of carefully determined magnitudes for some 300 stars using his own photometric system (mean error=0.4 mag).Celsius was the first to perform and publish careful experiments aiming at the definition of an international temperature scale on scientific grounds. In his Swedish paper "Observations of two persistent degrees on a thermometer" he reports on experiments to check that the freezing point is independent of latitude (and of atmospheric pressure). He determined the dependence of the boiling of water with atmospheric pressure which was accurate even by modern day standards. He further gave a rule for the determination of the boiling point if the barometric pressure deviates from a certain standard pressure.History of the Celsius temperature scale He proposed the Celsius temperature scale in a paper to the Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala, the oldest Swedish scientific society, founded in 1710. His thermometer was calibrated with a value of 0° for the boiling point of water and 100° for the freezing point. In 1745, a year after his death, the scale was reversed by Carl Linnaeus to facilitate more practical measurement.Linnaeus' thermometer Celsius originally called his scale centigrade derived from the Latin for "hundred steps". For years it was simply referred to as the Swedish thermometer.

Celsius conducted many geographical measurements for the Swedish General map, and was one of earliest to note that much of Scandinavia is slowly rising above sea level, a continuous process which has been occurring since the  melting of the ice from the latest ice age. However he wrongly posed the notion that the water was evaporating.In 1725 he became secretary of the Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala, and served at this post until his death from tuberculosis in 1744. He supported the formation of the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in Stockholm in 1739 by Linnaeus and five others, and was elected a member at the first meeting of this academy. It was in fact Celsius who proposed the new academy's name.Nordisk familjebok, volume 32 (1921): Vetenskapsakademin {{sv icon}}
References
{{Reflist}}

{{1911}}

{{Normdaten}}{{Scientists whose names are used as SI units}}{{Use dmy dates}}{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Celsius, Anders}}











ar:????? ??????
ast:Anders Celsius
az:Anders Selsi
bs:Anders Celsius
bg:?????? ??????
ca:Anders Celsius
cs:Anders Celsius
da:Anders Celsius
de:Anders Celsius
et:Anders Celsius
el:?????? ???????
es:Anders Celsius
eo:Anders Celsius
eu:Anders Celsius
fa:????? ??????
fr:Anders Celsius
fy:Anders Celsius
ga:Anders Celsius
gl:Anders Celsius
ko:???? ????
hy:?????? ????????
hi:??????? ????????
hr:Anders Celsius
io:Anders Celsius
id:Anders Celsius
it:Anders Celsius
he:????? ??????
jv:Anders Celsius
ka:?????? ????????
kk:??????? ??????
ku:Anders Celsius
la:Andreas Celsius
lv:Anderss Celsijs
lb:Anders Celsius
lt:Anders Celsius
hu:Anders Celsius
mk:?????? ???????
mr:?????? ????????
ms:Anders Celsius
nl:Anders Celsius
ja:???????????
no:Anders Celsius
nn:Anders Celsius
nds:Anders Celsius
pl:Anders Celsius
pt:Anders Celsius
ro:Anders Celsius
ru:???????, ??????
simple:Anders Celsius
sk:Anders Celsius
sl:Anders Celsius
sr:?????? ????????
sh:Anders Celsius
fi:Anders Celsius
sv:Anders Celsius
th:???????? ????????
tr:Anders Celsius
uk:?????? ???????
vi:Anders Celsius
zh:???·????