title{{redirect}}

Angels have appeared in works of art for millennia.
Angel-shaped beings appear in ancient Mesopotamian and Greek art and were probably the inspiration for the popular Christian image of angels.Angels remained a popular subject for Byzantine and European paintings and sculpture.  Angels have also become an integral part of Anime culture, particularly in fan art and webcomics.
In Christian art
The earliest known Christian image of an angel, in the Cubicolo dell'Annunziazione in the Catacomb of Priscilla, which is dated to the middle of the third century, is without wings. Representations of angels on sarcophagi and on objects such as lamps and reliquaries of that period also show them without wings,Proverbio(2007), pp. 81-89; cf. review in La Civiltà Cattolica, 3795-3796 (2–16 August 2008), pp. 327-328. as for example the angel in the Sacrifice of Isaac scene in the Sarcophagus of Junius Bassus.The earliest known representation of angels with wings is on what is called the Prince's Sarcophagus, discovered at Sarigüzel, near Istanbul, in the 1930s, and attributed to the time of Theodosius I (379-395).Proverbio(2007) p. 66In this same period, Saint John Chrysostom explained the significance of angels' wings: "They manifest a nature's sublimity. That is why Gabriel is represented with wings. Not that angels have wings, but that you may know that they leave the heights and the most elevated dwelling to approach human nature. Accordingly, the wings attributed to these powers have no other meaning than to indicate the sublimity of their nature."Proverbio(2007) p. 34From then on, though of course with some exceptions, Christian art represented angels with wings, as in the cycle of mosaics in the Basilica of Saint Mary Major (432-440).Proverbio(2007), pp. 90-95; cf. review in La Civiltà Cattolica, 3795-3796 (2–16 August 2008), pp. 327-328.  Multi-winged angels, often with only their face and wings showing, drawn from the higher grades of angels, especially cherubim and seraphim, are derived from Persian art, and are usually shown only in heavenly contexts, as opposed to performing tasks on earth.  They often appear in the pendentives of domes or semi-domes of churches.Angels, especially the Archangel Michael, who were depicted as military-style agents of God, came to be shown wearing Late Antique military uniform.  This could be either the normal military dress, with a tunic to about the knees, armour breastplate and pteruges, but also often the specific dress of the bodyguard of the Byzantine Emperor, with a long tunic and the loros, a long gold and jewelled  pallium restricted to the Imperial family and their closest guards.  The basic military dress it is still worn in pictures into the Baroque period and beyond in the West (see Reni picture above), and up to the present day in Eastern Orthodox icons.  Other angels came to be conventionally depicted in long robes, and in the later Middle Ages they often wear the vestments of a deacon, a cope over a dalmatic, especially Gabriel in Annunciation scenes - for example the Annunciation in Washington by Jan van Eyck.A few noteworthy examples are:

The Ecstasy of St Theresa by Gian Lorenzo Bernini
Annunciations by many artists.
The Sopo Archangels
Ángel arcabucero, Latin American angels with guns


Contemporary works of art with angelsAngels in contemporary art and illustration 
Anime and manga

Air
Angel Sanctuary
Angel Wars
Chrono Crusade
D.N.Angel
Haibane Renmei
Megatokyo
Neon Genesis Evangelion
Oh My Goddess!
On Your Mark
Pitaten
Sailor Moon
Tenshi ni Narumon
The Vision of Escaflowne
X/1999


Art

Angel of the North
Based on a vision he experienced, British artist Donald Pass mostly paints angels.


Books

Good Omens
His Dark Materials
Shadowmancer
The Vintner's Luck
The Mysterious Stranger


Comic books


Angelus
Supergirl: Wings
Fallen Angel
Lucifer (DC Comics)


Games

Tarot


Collectible card games


Anio?owie - Fantastyczna Gra Karciana
Heresy: Kingdom Come
Magic: The Gathering


Video and computer games

Diablo 2
Final Fantasy
Kid Icarus
Devil May Cry 4


Movies

Almost an Angel
Always (remake of A Guy Named Joe)
Angels in the Outfield (1951 original)
Angels in the Outfield (1994 remake)
Angels in the Endzone
Angels in the Infield
Angel on My Shoulder
The Angel Who Pawned Her Harp
Aniol w Krakowie
Barbarella
The Bishop's Wife
City of Angels (an American remake of Wings of Desire)
Clarence
Constantine
Date with an Angel (a reworking of I Married an Angel)
Dogma
Down to Earth (1947 sequel to Here Comes Mr. Jordan)
Down to Earth (2001 remake of Here Comes Mr. Jordan),
Faraway, So Close! (a sequel to Wings of Desire)
Forever, Darling
Gabriel
A Guy Named Joe
Heaven Can Wait (remake of Here Comes Mr. Jordan)
Heaven's Touch (remake of Here Comes Mr. Jordan)
The Heavenly Kid
Here Comes Mr. Jordan
Legion
The Horn Blows at Midnight
I Married an Angel
It's a Wonderful Life
Michael
Mr. Destiny
One Magic Christmas
The Preacher's Wife (a remake of The Bishop's Wife)
The Prophecy
Two of a Kind
Wings of Desire


Plays

Angels in America (later remade as an HBO mini-series)


Classical music


Jeptha
St Francis of Assisi
Don Carlos
Angels in America (opera version)
Black Angels (George Crumb)
Angel of Light (Symphony No. 7) (Einojuhani Rautavaara)
Angels and Visitations (Einojuhani Rautavaara)


Popular music

Canticle of the Plains, musical called a retelling of the life of St. Francis
&#34;Beauty School Dropout&#34; - sung by an angel - From the soundtrack of the 1978 film Grease, performed by Frankie Avalon
&#34;Number One Song In Heaven&#34; - from the 1979 album No. 1 In Heaven by the American pop band Sparks


TV series

Fallen (ABC Family Miniseries)
Highway to Heaven
Neverwhere
Supernatural (TV series)
Touched by an Angel


Gallery<gallery>
Image:Bouguereau The Virgin With Angels.jpg|The Virgin With Angels, William-Adolphe Bouguereau
Image:Abraham and the Three Angels.png|Abraham and the three angels by Gustave Doré
Image:Guido_Reni_031.jpg|Archangel Michael by Guido Reni
Image:Fouquet Madonna.jpg|Madonna Surrounded by Seraphim and Cherubim by Jean Fouquet
Image:Jacob-angel.jpg|Jacob wrestling with the Angel, by Gustave Doré
Image:Seraphim - Petites Heures de Jean de Berry.jpg|God surrounded by Seraphim (Petites Heures of Jean de France, Duc de Berry)
File:Cathedral St Michaels Victory.jpg|St Michaels Victory over the Devil, a sculpture by Sir Jacob Epstein
File:Giotto - Scrovegni - -36- - Lamentation (The Mourning of Christ).jpg|Lamentation by Giotto di Bondone
Image:The Annunciation.jpg|Annunciation by Leonardo Da Vinci
Image:Paradiso Canto 31.jpg|Rosa Celeste: by Gustave Doré
File:Aniol z dudami.jpg|by Jan Matejko
File:07Thessaloniki St-Dimetrios03.jpg|Church of Saint Demetrius Patron Saint of Thessaloniki
</gallery>
Notes{{reflist}}
References

{{cite book}}


External links

Saints and Angels Collection -- Original Paintings, Prints and Sculptures by James Christensen
Black and White Angel Photography
Angels today - collection of angels pictures, information about archangels
Donald Pass - contemporary art on angels
Angel Art Gallery - Free Large Slideshow

{{commons category}}{{DEFAULTSORT:Angels In Art}}

fr:Ange dans l'art