title{{For}}
{{Use British English}}
{{Infobox person}}Sir Philip Anthony Hopkins, CBE (born 31 December 1937), best known as Anthony Hopkins, is a Welsh actor of film, stage and television. Considered to be one of the greatest living actors,{{cite news}}{{cite web}}{{cite news}} Hopkins is perhaps best known for his portrayal of cannibalistic serial killer Hannibal Lecter in The Silence of the Lambs (for which he received the Academy Award for Best Actor), its sequel Hannibal, and its prequel Red Dragon. Other prominent film credits include The Lion in Winter, Magic, The Elephant Man, 84 Charing Cross Road, Dracula, Legends of the Fall, The Remains of the Day, Amistad, Nixon, and Fracture. Hopkins was born and brought up in Wales. Retaining his British citizenship, he became a U.S. citizen on 12 April 2000.{{cite web}} Hopkins' films have spanned a wide variety of genres, from family films to horror. As well as his Academy Award, Hopkins has also won three BAFTA Awards, two Emmys and the Cecil B. DeMille Golden Globe Award.
Hopkins was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II in 1993 for services to the arts. He received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2003, and was made a Fellow of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts in 2008.
Early lifeHopkins was born in Margam, Port Talbot, Wales, the son of Muriel Anne (née Yeats) and Richard Arthur Hopkins, a baker.Stated in interview on Inside the Actors Studio, 2007 His schooldays were unproductive; he found that he would rather immerse himself in art, such as painting and drawing, or playing the piano, than attend to his studies. In 1949, to instill discipline, his parents insisted he attend Jones' West Monmouth Boys' School in Pontypool, Wales. He remained there for five terms and was then educated at Cowbridge Grammar School in the Vale of Glamorgan, Wales.Anthony Hopkins: My life in pictures Daily Mail Retrieved 6 January 2011Hopkins was influenced and encouraged to become an actor by Welsh compatriot Richard Burton (who was also born at Neath Port Talbot), whom he met briefly at the age of 15. To that end, he enrolled at the Royal Welsh College of Music & Drama in Cardiff, Wales, from which he graduated in 1957. After two years in the British Army doing his national service, he moved to London where he trained at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art.A dark and stormy knight The Guardian Retrieved 6 January 2011
Career
Roles
Hopkins made his first professional stage appearance in the Palace Theatre, Swansea in 1960 with Swansea Little Theatre's production of Have A Cigarette.{{cite web}} In 1965, after several years in repertory, he was spotted by Sir Laurence Olivier, who invited him to join the Royal National Theatre.Sir Anthony Hopkins portrait The Telegraph Retrieved Thursday 6 January 2011 Hopkins became Olivier's understudy, and filled in when Olivier was struck with appendicitis during a production of August Strindberg's The Dance of Death. Olivier later noted in his memoir, Confessions of an Actor, that, "A new young actor in the company of exceptional promise named Anthony Hopkins was understudying me and walked away with the part of Edgar like a cat with a mouse between its teeth."{{cite book}}
Despite his success at the National, Hopkins tired of repeating the same roles nightly and yearned to be in films. He made his small-screen debut in a 1967 BBC broadcast of A Flea in Her Ear. In 1968, he got his break in The Lion in Winter playing Richard I, along with Peter O'Toole, Katharine Hepburn, and future James Bond star Timothy Dalton, who played Philip II of France.Although Hopkins continued in theatre (most notably at the National Theatre as Lambert Le Roux in Pravda by David Hare and Howard Brenton and as Antony in Antony and Cleopatra opposite Judi Dench as well as in the Broadway production of Peter Shaffer's Equus, directed by John Dexter) he gradually moved away from it to become more established as a television and film actor. His Pierre Bezukhov for the BBC War and Peace (1972) was particularly memorable. He has since gone on to enjoy a long career, winning many plaudits and awards for his performances. In 1980 he starred opposite Shirley MacLaine in A Change of Seasons and famously said “she was the most obnoxious actress I have ever worked with."{{cite book}} Hopkins was made a Commander of the British Empire (CBE) in 1987, and a Knight Bachelor in 1993.BBC – Wales – Arts – Top 10 Welsh actors: Anthony Hopkins BBC Retrieved 2 January 2010Actor Anthony Hopkins Knighted By Queen Elizabeth Chicago Tribune (23 February 1993) In 1988, Hopkins was made an Honorary D.Litt and in 1992 was awarded Honorary fellowship from the University of Wales, Lampeter. Hopkins was Britain's highest paid performer in 1998, starring in The Mask of Zorro and Meet Joe Black, and also agreed to reprise his role as Dr Hannibal Lecter for a fee of £15million. Hopkins received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2003.Happy birthday Sir Anthony Hopkins The Daily Telegraph (Sydney). Retrieved 5 February 2011Hopkins has stated that his role as Burt Munro, whom he portrayed in his 2005 film The World's Fastest Indian, was his favourite. He also asserted that Munro was the easiest role that he had played because both men have a similar outlook on life.{{cite web}} In 2006, Hopkins was the recipient of the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award for lifetime achievement.Lifetime honour for Sir Anthony BBC News (17 November 2005) In 2008, he received the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award.Bafta Film Awards 2008: The winners BBC News (10 February 2008)Hopkins portrayed Odin, the Allfather or "king" of Asgard, in the film adaptation of Marvel Comics' Thor.{{cite news}} On 24 February 2010, it was announced that Hopkins had been cast in the supernatural thriller The Rite, which was released on 28 January 2011. He played a priest who is "an expert in exorcisms and whose methods are not necessarily traditional".{{cite web}} An agnostic, he wrote a line--"Some days I don't know if I believe in God or Santa Claus or Tinkerbell"--into his character in order to identify with it.Anthony Hopkins reveals the secret atheist message he put into The Rite On 21 September 2011, Peter R. de Vries named Hopkins in the role of the Heineken owner Freddy Heineken in a future movie about his kidnap.
Acting styleHopkins is renowned for his preparation for roles. He has indicated in interviews that once he has committed to a project, he will go over his lines as many times as is needed (sometimes upwards of 200) until the lines sound natural to him, so that he can "do it without thinking". This leads to an almost casual style of delivery that belies the amount of groundwork done beforehand. While it can allow for some careful improvisation, it has also brought him into conflict with the occasional director who departs from the script, or demands what the actor views as an excessive number of takes. Hopkins has stated that after he is finished with a scene, he simply discards the lines, not remembering them later on. This is unlike others who usually remember their lines from a film even years later."Anthony Hopkins: Lecter and Me"&nbsp;— Red Dragon DVD interview Richard Attenborough, who has directed Hopkins on five occasions, found himself going to great lengths during the filming of Shadowlands (1993) to accommodate the differing approaches of his two stars (Hopkins and Debra Winger), who shared many scenes. Whereas Hopkins, preferring the spontaneity of a fresh take, liked to keep rehearsals to a minimum, Winger rehearsed continuously. To allow for this, Attenborough stood in for Hopkins during Winger's rehearsals, only bringing him in for the last one before a take. The director praised Hopkins for "this extraordinary ability to make you believe when you hear him that it is the very first time he has ever said that line. It's an incredible gift."Renowned for his ability to remember lines, Hopkins keeps his memory supple by learning things by heart such as poetry, and Shakespeare. In Steven Spielberg's Amistad, Hopkins astounded the crew with his memorisation of a seven-page courtroom speech, delivering it in one go. An overawed Spielberg couldn't bring himself to call him Tony, and insisted on addressing him as Sir Anthony throughout the shoot.In addition, Hopkins is a gifted mimic, adept at turning his native Welsh accent into whatever is required by a character. He duplicated the voice of his late mentor, Laurence Olivier, for additional scenes in Spartacus in its 1991 restoration. His interview on the 1998 relaunch edition of the British TV talk show Parkinson featured an impersonation of comedian Tommy Cooper. Hopkins has said acting "like a submarine" has helped him to deliver credible performances in his thriller movies. He said, "It's very difficult for an actor to avoid, you want to show a bit. But I think the less one shows the better."{{cite web}}
Hannibal LecterPerhaps Hopkins' most famous role is as the cannibalistic serial killer Hannibal Lecter in The Silence of the Lambs, for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor in 1991, opposite Jodie Foster as Clarice Starling, who also won for Best Actress. The film won Best Picture, Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay. It is one of the shortest lead performances to win an Oscar, as Hopkins only appears on screen for little over 16 minutes, less than 10% of the film's running-time. Hopkins reprised his role as Lecter twice in Hannibal (2001) and Red Dragon (2002). His original portrayal of the character in The Silence of the Lambs has been labelled by the American Film Institute as the number-one film villain.{{cite web}} At the time he was offered the role, Hopkins was making a return to the London stage, performing in M. Butterfly. He had come back to Britain after living for a number of years in Hollywood, having all but given up on a career there, saying, "Well that part of my life's over; it's a chapter closed. I suppose I'll just have to settle for being a respectable actor poncing around the West End and doing respectable BBC work for the rest of my life."Hopkins played the iconic villain in adaptations of the first three of the Lecter novels by Thomas Harris. The author was reportedly very pleased with Hopkins' portrayal of his antagonist. However, Hopkins stated that Red Dragon would feature his final performance as the character, and that he would not reprise even a narrative role in the latest addition to the series, Hannibal Rising.
Personal lifeAs of 2007, Hopkins resides in Los Angeles. He had moved to the United States once before during the 1970s to pursue his film career, but returned to London in the late 1980s. However, he decided to return to the US following his 1990s success. Retaining his British citizenship, he became a naturalised US citizen on 12 April 2000, and celebrated with a 3,000-mile road trip across the country.BBC – Wales – Arts – Anthony Hopkins biography BBC Retrieved 2 January 2010Hopkins has been married three times. His first two wives were Petronella Barker (1967–1972) and Jennifer Lynton (1973–2002). He is now married to Colombian-born Stella Arroyave. He has a daughter from his first marriage, Abigail Hopkins (b. 20 August 1968), who is an actress and singer.Hopkins has offered his support to various charities and appeals, notably becoming President of the National Trust's Snowdonia Appeal, raising funds for the preservation of the Snowdonia National Park in North Wales, which in 1998 he donated £1million towards, and to aid the Trust's efforts to purchase parts of Snowdon.Anthony Hopkins gives pounds 1m to Snowdon Independent. Retrieved 19 October 2011Hopkins gives a million to save Snowdon BBC. Retrieved 19 October 2011 Prior to the campaign, Hopkins authored, Anthony Hopkins' Snowdonia, which was published in 1995.Hopkins, Anthony (1995). Anthony Hopkins' Snowdonia. Colin Baxter Photography, 1995 Hopkins has been a patron of the YMCA centre in his hometown of Port Talbot, South Wales for more than 20 years, having first joined the YMCA in the 1950s.Drama returns to YMCA where Sir Anthony Hopkins started BBC Wales (20 July 2010) Hopkins also takes time to support other various philanthropic groups. He was a Guest of Honour at a Gala Fundraiser for Women in Recovery, Inc., a Venice, California-based non-profit organisation offering rehabilitation assistance to women in recovery from substance abuse. Although he resides in Malibu, California he is also a volunteer teacher at the Ruskin School of Acting in Santa Monica, California.Hopkins has attended Alcoholics Anonymous meetings,{{cite news}} since suddenly stopping drinking in 1975. As stated to TMZ in October 2010, Hopkins is a vegetarian. In 2008, he embarked on a weight loss program, and by 2010, he had lost 80 pounds.{{cite news}}Hopkins is a prominent member of environmental protection group Greenpeace and as of early 2008 featured in a television advertisement campaign, voicing concerns about Japan's continuing annual whale hunt.{{cite web}} Hopkins has been a patron of RAPt (Rehabilitation for Addicted Prisoners Trust) since its early days and helped open their first intensive drug and alcohol rehabilitation unit at Downview (HM Prison) in 1992.He is an admirer of the comedian Tommy Cooper. On 23 February 2008, as patron of the Tommy Cooper Society, the actor unveiled a commemorative statue in the entertainer's home town of Caerphilly, South Wales. For the ceremony, Hopkins donned Cooper's trademark fez and performed a comic routine.{{cite news}}
Other workIn 1986, he released a single called "Distant Star", which peaked at No. 75 in the UK Singles Chart.{{cite book}} In 2007, he announced he would retire temporarily from the screen to tour around the world.{{cite web}} Hopkins has also written music for the concert hall, in collaboration with Stephen Barton as orchestrator. These compositions include The Masque of Time, given its world premiere with the Dallas Symphony Orchestra in October 2008, and Schizoid Salsa.{{cite news}} {{Dead link}}In 1990, Hopkins directed "Dylan Thomas: Return Journey" which was his directing debut for the screen. In 1996, he directed August, an adaptation of Chekhov's Uncle Vanya set in Wales. His first screenplay, an experimental drama called Slipstream, which he also directed and scored, premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in 2007.Hopkins is a fan of the BBC sitcom Only Fools and Horses, and once remarked in an interview how he would love to appear in the series. Writer John Sullivan saw the interview, and with Hopkins in mind created the character Danny Driscoll, a local villain. However, filming of the new series coincided with the filming of The Silence of the Lambs, making Hopkins unavailable. The role instead went to Roy Marsden.{{cite book}}
AwardsBesides his win for The Silence of the Lambs, Hopkins has been Oscar-nominated for The Remains of the Day (1993), Nixon (1995) and Amistad (1997).Hopkins won the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in 1973 for his performance as Pierre Bezukhov in the BBC's production of War and Peace, and additionally for The Silence of the Lambs and Shadowlands. He received nominations in the same category for Magic and The Remains of the Day and as Best Supporting Actor for The Lion in Winter.He won Emmy AwardsAnthony Hopkins Emmy Winner for his roles in The Lindbergh Kidnapping Case and The Bunker, and was Emmy-nominated for The Hunchback of Notre Dame and Great Expectations.{{cite web}} He won the directing and the acting award, both for Slipstream, at Switzerland's Locarno International Film Festival.Hopkins became a Fellow of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) at the Orange British Academy Film Awards in February 2008.{{cite web}}
Filmography{{main}}
References{{Reflist}}
External links{{Commons category}}

{{IBDB name}}
{{IMDb name}}
{{tcmdb name}}
{{Screenonline name}}
Anthony Hopkins at BBC Wales
Anthony Hopkins, Giant of the Valley — by Michael Feeney Callan, 2007 Voyager Magazine
Anthony Hopkins interviewed on HTV-Wales program Elinor in the 1980s
An Evening with Anthony Hopkins HTV-Wales
Early voice-over on HTV-Wales programme
Anthony Hopkins, BAFTA Fellow in 2008
Fellow Man&nbsp;– Anthony Hopkins, BAFTA profile by film writer Quentin Falk
Anthony Hopkins at Emmys.com

{{Template group}}{{Use dmy dates}}{{Persondata}}{{DEFAULTSORT:Hopkins, Anthony}}

























ar:?????? ??????
an:Anthony Hopkins
az:Entoni Hopkins
be:?????? ???????
be-x-old:?????? ???????
bg:?????? ???????
ca:Anthony Hopkins
cs:Anthony Hopkins
cy:Anthony Hopkins
da:Anthony Hopkins
de:Anthony Hopkins
et:Anthony Hopkins
el:?????? ???????
es:Anthony Hopkins
eu:Anthony Hopkins
fa:?????? ???????
fr:Anthony Hopkins
gl:Anthony Hopkins
ko:??? ???
hi:????? ???????
hr:Anthony Hopkins
io:Anthony Hopkins
id:Anthony Hopkins
is:Anthony Hopkins
it:Anthony Hopkins
he:?????? ???????
kn:????? ?????????????
ka:?????? ????????
la:Antonius Hopkins
lv:Entonijs Hopkinss
lt:Anthony Hopkins
hu:Anthony Hopkins
mk:?????? ???????
ml:?????? ?????????
nl:Anthony Hopkins
ja:???????????
no:Anthony Hopkins
nn:Anthony Hopkins
ps:?????? ???????
pl:Anthony Hopkins
pt:Anthony Hopkins
ro:Anthony Hopkins
ru:???????, ??????
sq:Entoni Hopkins
simple:Anthony Hopkins
sk:Anthony Hopkins
sl:Anthony Hopkins
sr:?????? ???????
sh:Anthony Hopkins
fi:Anthony Hopkins
sv:Anthony Hopkins
tl:Anthony Hopkins
te:?????? ??????????
th:??????? ?????????
tr:Anthony Hopkins
uk:?????? ???????
vi:Anthony Hopkins
yo:Anthony Hopkins
zh:???·????