title{{distinguish}}
{{Infobox Former Country}}The Antigonid dynasty (Greek: ????????? ??? ???????????) was a dynasty of Hellenistic kings descended from Alexander the Great's general Antigonus I Monophthalmus ("the One-eyed").
History
Succeeding the Antipatrid dynasty in much of Macedonia, Antigonus ruled mostly over Asia Minor and northern Syria.  His attempts to take control of the whole of Alexander's empire led to his defeat and death at the Battle of Ipsus in 301 BC. Antigonus's son Demetrius I Poliorcetes survived the battle, and managed to seize control of Macedon itself a few years later, but eventually lost his throne, dying in prison. After a period of confusion, Demetrius's son Antigonus II Gonatas was able to establish the family's control over the old Kingdom of Macedon, as well as over most of the Greek city-states, by 276 BC.{{cite book}}
Legacy
It was one of four dynasties established by Alexander's successors, the others being the Seleucid dynasty, Ptolemaic dynasty and Attalid dynasty. The last scion of the dynasty, Perseus of Macedon, who reigned between 179-168 BCE, proved unable to stop the advancing Roman legions and Macedon's defeat at the Battle of Pydna signaled the end of the dynasty.Britannica, Antigonid dynasty, 2008, O.Ed. But Perseus’ failure to deploy his full resources brought about his defeat (168) at Pydna in Macedonia and signaled the end of the dynasty."
Dynasty


The members of the Antigonid dynasty were:

Antigonid Rulers
King  Reign (BCE)  Consort(s)  Comments 
Antigonus I Monophthalmus  306 BC – 301 BC  Stratonice   
Demetrius I Poliorcetes  294 BC-287 BC  Phila  Ptolemais  Ptolemais was a daughter of Ptolemy I Soter and mother of Demetrius the Fair, King of Cyrene. 
Antigonus II Gonatas  276 BC-239 BC  Phila  Son of Demetrius Poliorcetes, grandson of Antigonus 
Demetrius II Aetolicus  239 BC-229 BC  Stratonice of Macedon  Phthia of Epirus  Nicaea of Corinth  Son of Antigonus II and Phila 
Antigonus III Doson  229 BC - 221 BC  Phthia of Epirus  Son of Demetrius the Fair, King of Cyrene. 
Philip V  221 BC-179 BC  Polycratia of Argos  Son of Demetrius II and Phthia of Epirus 
Perseus  179 BC-168 BC  Laodice V, Seleucid Princess   
The Greek rebel against Rome and last King of Macedonia, Andriscus, claimed to be the son of Perseus.
See also

List of kings of Macedon


References{{Reflist}}{{Diadochi}}
{{Hellenistic rulers}}{{DEFAULTSORT:Antigonid Dynasty}}




ast:Dinastía Antígona
bs:Antigonidi
bg:??????????
ca:Dinastia antigònida
cs:Antigonovci
de:Antigoniden
el:????????? ??? ???????????
es:Dinastía Antigónida
fr:Antigonides
ko:????? ??
hr:Antigonidi
it:Dinastia antigonide
la:Antigonidae
mk:??????????
nl:Antigoniden
ja:????????
no:Antigoniddynastiet
pl:Antygonidzi
pt:Dinastia dos Antígonas
simple:Antigonid dynasty
sk:Antigonovci
sr:??????????
sh:Antigonidi
fi:Antigonidien hallitsijasuku
sv:Antigoniderna
vi:Nhà Antigonos
zh:?????