titleAntipope Felix II was installed as Pope in 355 after the Emperor Constantius II banished the reigning Pope, Liberius, for refusing to subscribe the sentence of condemnation against Saint Athanasius. In May 357 the Roman laity, which had remained faithful to Liberius, demanded that Constantius, who was on a visit to Rome, should recall Liberius. The Emperor planned to have Felix and Liberius rule jointly, but when Liberius returned Felix was forced to retire to Porto, near Rome, where, after making an unsuccessful attempt to establish himself again in Rome, he died on 22 November 365.Encyclopaedia Britannica: Felix (II)The Papal Schism between Liberius and Felix, 1–4This Felix was later confused with a Roman martyr named Felix, with the result that he was included in lists of the Popes as Felix II and that the succeeding Popes of the same name (Pope Felix III and Pope Felix IV) were given wrong numerals, as was Antipope Felix V.Annuario Pontificio 2008 (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 2008 ISBN 978-88-209-8021-4), p. 9*The Catholic Encyclopedia (1909) called this confusion a "distortion of the true facts" and suggested that it arose because the "Liber Pontificalis", which at this point may be registering a reliable tradition, says that this Felix built a church on the Via Aurelia, which is where the Roman martyr of an earlier date was buried.Catholic Encyclopedia: Felix II However, a more recent source says that of the martyr Felix nothing is known except his name, that he was a martyr, and that he was buried in the cemetery on the Via Portuensis that bears his name.Calendarium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 1969), p. 132The Catholic Encyclopedia remarked that "the real story of the antipope was lost and he obtained in local Roman history the status of a saint and a confessor. As such he appears in the Roman Martyrology on 29 July." At that time (1909) the Roman Martyrology had the following text: {{quote}} This entry was based on what the Catholic Encyclopedia called later legends that confound the relative positions of Felix and Liberius. More recent editions of the Roman MartyrologyMartyrologium Romanum (Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 2001 ISBN 88-209-7210-7) have instead: {{quote}}The feast day of the Roman martyr Felix is 29 July. The antipope Felix died, as stated above, on a 22 November, and his death was not a martyr's,1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica: Felix II occurring when the Peace of Constantine had been in force for half a century.As well as the Roman Martyrology, the Roman Missal identified the Saint Felix of 29 July with the antipope. This identification, still found in the 1920 typical edition,1920 typical edition of the Roman Missal, with feasts updated to the late 1920s does not appear in the 1962 typical edition.1962 typical edition of the Roman Missal To judge by the Marietti printing of 1952, which omits the numeral "II" and the word "Papae", the correction had already been made by then.
References{{reflist}}
External links

The Papal Schism between Liberius and Felix (a primary source)
Catholic Encyclopedia: Felix II
Encyclopaedia Britannica: Felix (II)
1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica: Felix II

{{Antipopes}}
{{Use dmy dates}}{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Felix, Antipope, 02}}




ca:Fèlix II
cs:Felix II. (vzdoropapež)
da:Modpave Felix 2.
de:Felix II. (Gegenpapst)
el:????????? ????? ??
es:Félix II (antipapa)
fr:Félix II
gl:Fiz II, antipapa
hr:Feliks (II.)
id:Anti-Paus Feliks II
it:Antipapa Felice II
he:????? ????
la:Felix II
hu:II. Félix (ellenpápa)
nl:Tegenpaus Felix II
ja:?????2? (????)
pl:Antypapie? Feliks II
pt:Antipapa Félix II
ru:?????? II (????????)
sh:Antipapa Feliks II
fi:Felix II
sv:Felix II (motpåve)
uk:?????? II (????????)
vi:Giáo hoàng ??i l?p Fêlix II