title{{Infobox Roman emperor}}
{{Antonine dynasty}}Antoninus Pius ({{lang-la}};Weigel, Antoninus PiusIn Classical Latin, Antoninus' name would be inscribed as TITVS AELIVS HADRIANVS ANTONINVS AVGVSTVS PIVS. 19 September 86 – 7 March 161), also known as Antoninus, was Roman Emperor from 138 to 161. He was a member of the Nerva-Antonine dynasty and the Aurelii.Bowman, pg. 150  He did not possess the sobriquet "Pius" until after his accession to the throne. Almost certainly, he earned the name "Pius" because he compelled the Senate to deify his adoptive father Hadrian;Birley, pg. 54; Dio, 70:1:2 the Historia Augusta, however, suggests that he may have earned the name by saving senators sentenced to death by Hadrian in his later years.Birley, pg. 55; Historia Augusta, Life of Hadrian 24.4
Early life
Childhood and familyHe was the son and only child of Titus Aurelius Fulvus, consul in 89Bowman, pg. 150 whose family came from Nemausus (modern Nîmes).Bury, pg. 523  He was born near LanuviumHarvey, Paul B., Religion in republican Italy, Cambridge University Press, 2006, pg. 134; Canduci, pg. 39 and his mother was Arria Fadilla. Antoninus’ father and paternal grandfather died when he was young and he was raised by Gnaeus Arrius Antoninus,Bowman, pg. 150 his maternal grandfather, reputed by contemporaries to be a man of integrity and culture and a friend of Pliny the Younger. His mother married Publius Julius Lupus (a man of consular rank) suffect consul in 98, and bore him two daughters Arria Lupula and Julia Fadilla.Birley, pg. 242; Historia Augusta, Life of Antoninus Pius 1:6
Marriage and childrenAs a private citizen between 110 and 115, he married Annia Galeria Faustina the Elder.  They are believed to have enjoyed a happy marriage. Faustina was the daughter of consul Marcus Annius VerusBowman, pg. 150 and Rupilia Faustina (a half-sister to Roman Empress Vibia Sabina). Faustina was a beautiful woman, renowned for her wisdom. She spent her whole life caring for the poor and assisting the most disadvantaged Romans.Faustina bore Antoninus four children, two sons and two daughters.Birley, pg. 34; Historia Augusta, Life of Antoninus Pius 1:7 They were:

Marcus Aurelius Fulvus Antoninus (died before 138); his sepulchral inscription has been found at the Mausoleum of Hadrian in Rome.Magie, David, Historia Augusta (1921), Life of Antoninus Pius, Note 6
Marcus Galerius Aurelius Antoninus (died before 138); his sepulchral inscription has been found at the Mausoleum of Hadrian in Rome.  His name appears on a Greek Imperial coin.
Aurelia Fadilla (died in 135); she married Lucius Lamia Silvanus, consul 145. She appeared to have no children with her husband and her sepulchral inscription has been found in Italy.Magie, David, Historia Augusta (1921), Life of Antoninus Pius, Note 7
Annia Galeria Faustina Minor or Faustina the Younger (between 125–130–175), a future Roman Empress, married her maternal cousin, future Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius in 146.Bury, pg. 523

When Faustina died in 141, Antoninus was greatly bereaved.Bury, pg. 528  In honor of her memory, Antoninus asked the Senate to deify her as a goddess, and he authorised the construction of a temple to be built in the Roman Forum in her name, with priestesses serving in her temple.Birley, pg. 77; Historia Augusta, Life of Antoninus Pius 6:7  He had various coins with her portrait struck in her honor. These coins were scripted ‘DIVAE FAUSTINA’ and were elaborately decorated. He further created a charity which he founded and called it Puellae Faustinianae or Girls of Faustina, which assisted orphaned girls.  Finally, Antoninus created a new alimenta (see Grain supply to the city of Rome).
Favor with HadrianHaving filled the offices of quaestor and praetor with more than usual success,Traver, Andrew G., From polis to empire, the ancient world, c. 800 B.C.-A.D. 500, (2002) pg. 33; Historia Augusta, Life of Antoninus Pius 2:9 he obtained the consulship in 120; he was next appointed by the Emperor Hadrian as one of the four proconsuls to administer Italia,Bowman, pg. 149 then greatly increased his reputation by his conduct as proconsul of Asia, probably during 134-135.Bowman, pg. 149  He acquired much favor with the Emperor Hadrian, who adopted him as his son and successor on 25 February 138,Bowman,pg. 148 after the death of his first adopted son Lucius Aelius,Bury, pg. 517 on the condition that Antoninus would in turn adopt Marcus Annius Verus, the son of his wife's brother, and Lucius, son of Aelius Verus, who afterwards became the emperors Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus.
Emperor


On his accession, Antoninus' name became "Imperator Caesar Titus Aelius Hadrianus Antoninus Augustus Pontifex Maximus". One of his first acts as Emperor was to persuade the Senate to grant divine honours to Hadrian, which they had at first refused;Bowman, pg. 151 his efforts to persuade the Senate to grant these honours is the most likely reason given for his title of Pius (dutiful in affection; compare pietas).Birley, pg. 55; Canduci, pg. 39  Two other reasons for this title are that he would support his aged father-in-law with his hand at Senate meetings, and that he had saved those men that Hadrian, during his period of ill-health, had condemned to death.Bury,pg. 523  He built temples, theaters, and mausoleums, promoted the arts and sciences, and bestowed honours and financial rewards upon the teachers of rhetoric and philosophy.Weigel,Antoninus Pius  Antoninus made few initial changes when he became emperor, leaving intact as far as possible the arrangements instituted by Hadrian.Bowman, pg. 151There are no records of any military related acts in his time in which he participated. One modern scholar has written "It is almost certain not only that at no time in his life did he ever see, let alone command, a Roman army, but that, throughout the twenty-three years of his reign, he never went within five hundred miles of a legion".J. J. Wilkes, The Journal of Roman Studies, Volume LXXV 1985, ISSN 0075-4358, p. 242.  His reign was the most peaceful in the entire history of the Principate;Bury, pg. 525 while there were several military disturbances throughout the Empire in his time, in Mauretania, Iudaea, and amongst the Brigantes in Britannia, none of them are considered serious.Bury, pg. 525  It was however in Britain that Antoninus decided to follow a new, more aggressive path, with the appointment of a new governor in 139, Quintus Lollius Urbicus.Bowman, pg. 151  Under instructions from the emperor, he undertook an invasion of southern Scotland, winning some significant victories, and constructing the Antonine WallBowman, pg. 152 from the Firth of Forth to the Firth of Clyde, although it was soon abandoned for reasons that are still not quite clear.Bowman, pg. 155  There were also some troubles in Dacia Inferior which required the granting of additional powers to the procurator governor and the dispatchment of additional soldiers to the province.Bowman, pg. 155 Also during his reign the governor of Upper Germany, probably Caius Popillius Carus Pedo, built new fortifications in the Agri Decumates, advancing the Limes Germanicus fifteen miles forward in his province and neighboring Raetia.Birley, pg. 113Nevertheless, Antoninus was virtually unique among emperors in that he dealt with these crises without leaving Italy once during his reign,Speidel, Michael P., Riding for Caesar: The Roman Emperors' Horse Guards, Harvard University Press, 1997, pg. 50; Canduci, pg. 40 but instead dealt with provincial matters of war and peace through their governors or through imperial letters to the cities such as Ephesus (of which some were publicly displayed). This style of government was highly praised by his contemporaries and by later generations.See Victor, 15:3Of the public transactions of this period there is only the scantiest of information, but, to judge by what is extant, those twenty-two years were not remarkably eventful in comparison to those before and after his reign. However, he did take a great interest in the revision and practice of the law throughout the empire.Bury, pg. 526  Although he was not an innovator, he would not follow the absolute letter of the law; rather he was driven by concerns over humanity and equality, and introduced into Roman law many important new principles based upon this notion.Bury, pg. 526  In this, the emperor was assisted by five chief lawyers: L. Fulvius Aburnius Valens, an author of legal treatises; L. Volusius Maecianus, chosen to conduct the legal studies of Marcus Aurelius, and author of a large work on Fidei Commissa (Testamentary Trusts); L. Ulpius Marcellus, a prolific writer; and two others.Bury, pg. 526  His reign saw the appearance of the Institutes of Gaius, an elementary legal manual for beginners (see Gaius (jurist)).Bury, pg. 526Antoninus passed measures to facilitate the enfranchisement of slaves.Bury, pg. 527  In criminal law, Antoninus introduced the important principle that accused persons are not to be treated as guilty before trial.Bury, pg. 527  He also asserted the principle, that the trial was to be held, and the punishment inflicted, in the place where the crime had been committed. He mitigated the use of torture in examining slaves by certain limitations. Thus he prohibited the application of torture to children under fourteen years, though this rule had exceptions.Bury, pg. 527One highlight during his reign occurred in 148, with the nine-hundredth anniversary of the foundation of Rome being celebrated by the hosting of magnificent games in Rome.Bowman, pg, 154  It lasted a number of days, and a host of exotic animals were killed, including elephants, giraffes, tigers, rhinoceroses, crocodiles and hippopotami. While this increased Antoninus’s popularity, the frugal emperor had to debase the Roman currency. He decreased the silver purity of the denarius from 89% to 83.5% — the actual silver weight dropping from 2.88&nbsp;grams to 2.68&nbsp;grams.Bowman, pg. 155Tulane University "Roman Currency of the Principate"Scholars place Antoninus Pius as the leading candidate for fulfilling the role as a friend of Rabbi Judah the Prince. According to the Talmud (Avodah Zarah 10a-b), Rabbi Judah was very wealthy and greatly revered in Rome. He had a close friendship with "Antoninus", possibly Antoninus Pius,A. Mischcon, Abodah Zara, p.10a Soncino, 1988. Mischcon cites various sources, "SJ Rappaport... is of opinion that our Antoninus is Antoninus Pius." Other opinions cited suggest "Antoninus" was Caracalla, Lucius Verus or Alexander Severus. who would consult Rabbi Judah on various worldly and spiritual matters.After the longest reign since Augustus (surpassing Tiberius by a couple of months), Antoninus died of fever at Lorium in Etruria,Bowman, pg. 156; Victor, 15:7 about twelve miles (19&nbsp;km) from Rome, on 7 March 161,Bowman, pg. 156 giving the keynote to his life in the last word that he uttered when the tribune of the night-watch came to ask the password—"aequanimitas" (equanimity).Bury, pg. 532  His body was placed in Hadrian's mausoleum, a column was dedicated to him on the Campus Martius, and the temple he had built in the Forum in 141 to his deified wife Faustina was rededicated to the deified Faustina and the deified Antoninus.Bury, pg. 532
Historiography{{refimprove section}}

The only account of his life handed down to us is that of the Augustan History, an unreliable and mostly fabricated work. Nevertheless, it still contains information that is considered reasonably sound – for instance, it is the only source that mentions the erection of the Antonine Wall in Britain.Historia Augusta, Life of Antoninus Pius 5:4  Antoninus is unique among Roman emperors in that he has no other biographies. Historians have therefore turned to public records for what details we know.
In later scholarshipAntoninus in many ways was the ideal of the landed gentleman praised not only by ancient Romans, but also by later scholars of classical history, such as Edward Gibbon or the author of the article on Antoninus Pius in the ninth edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica:
{{quote}}Later historians had a more nuanced view of his reign. According to the historian J. B. Bury, {{quote}}Inevitably, the surviving evidence is not complete enough to determine whether one should interpret, with older scholars, that he wisely curtailed the activities of the Roman Empire to a careful minimum, or perhaps that he was uninterested in events away from Rome and Italy and his inaction contributed to the pressing troubles that faced not only Marcus Aurelius but also the emperors of the third century.  German historian Ernst Kornemann has had it in his Römische Geschichte [2 vols., ed. by H. Bengtson, Stuttgart 1954] that the reign of Antoninus comprised "a succession of grossly wasted opportunities," given the upheavals that were to come. There is more to this argument, given that the Parthians in the East were themselves soon to make no small amount of mischief after Antoninus' passing.  Kornemann's brief is that Antoninus might have waged preventive wars to head off these outsiders.
Notes{{reflist}}
References

Primary sources
Historia Augusta, The Life of Antoninus Pius, English version of Historia Augusta
Cassius Dio, Roman History, Book 70, http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Cassius_Dio/70*.html
Aurelius Victor, "Epitome de Caesaribus", English version of Epitome de Caesaribus



Secondary sources
Weigel, Richard D., "Antoninus Pius (A.D. 138-161)", De Imperatoribus Romanis
Bowman, Alan K.  The Cambridge Ancient History: The High Empire, A.D. 70-192. Cambridge University Press, 2000
Birley, Anthony, Marcus Aurelius, Routledge, 2000
{{citation}}
Bury, J. B. A History of the Roman Empire from its Foundation to the Death of Marcus Aurelius (1893)
Hüttl, W. Antoninus Pius vol. I &#38; II, Prag 1933 &#38; 1936.



Attribution
{{1911}} This source lists:
Bossart-Mueller, Zur Geschichte des Kaisers A. (1868)
Bryant, The Reign of Antonine (Cambridge Historical Essays, 1895)
Lacour-Gayet, A. le Pieux et son Temps (1888)
Watson, P. B. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (London, 1884), chap. ii.


External links{{Commons}}{{s-start}}
{{s-hou}}
{{s-reg}}
{{s-bef}}
{{s-ttl}}
{{s-aft}}
{{s-off}}
{{succession box}}
{{succession box}}
{{succession box}}
{{s-end}}
{{Roman Emperors}}{{Use dmy dates}}{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Pius, Antoninus}}






{{link FA}}
ar:???????? ????
an:Antonín Piu
az:Antonin Piy
bs:Antonin Pio
bg:??????? ???
ca:Antoní Pius
cs:Antoninus Pius
cy:Antoninus Pius
da:Antoninus Pius
de:Antoninus Pius
et:Antoninus Pius
el:????????? ????
es:Antonino Pío
eo:Antonino Pia
eu:Antonino Pio
fa:???????? ????
fr:Antonin le Pieux
fy:Antoninus Pius
gl:Antonino Pío
ko:????? ???
hr:Antonin Pio
hy:????????? ????
is:Antonínus Píus
it:Antonino Pio
he:????????? ????
ka:????????? ?????
sw:Antoninus Pius
la:Antoninus Pius
lt:Antoninas Pijus
hu:Titus Aurelius Antoninus Pius római császár
mk:??????? ???
ml:?????????? ????
mr:???????? ????
mn:???????? ??
nl:Antoninus Pius
ja:??????????
nap:Antonìn Piò
no:Antoninus Pius
nn:Antoninus Pius av Romarriket
pl:Antoninus Pius
pt:Antonino Pio
ro:Antoninus Pius
ru:??????? ???
scn:Antuninu Piu
simple:Antoninus Pius
sk:Antoninus Pius
sr:??????? ????
sh:Antonin Pije
fi:Antoninus Pius
sv:Antoninus Pius
tl:Antoninus Pius
th:??????????????????? ?????
tr:Antoninus Pius
uk:??????? ???
vi:Antoninus Pius
yo:Antoninus Pius
zh:???·??