title{{Infobox Space mission}}Apollo 7 was the first manned mission in the American Apollo space program, and the first manned US space flight after a cabin fire killed the crew of what was to have been the first manned mission, AS-204 (later renamed Apollo 1), during a launch pad test in 1967. It was a C type mission—an 11-day Earth-orbital mission, the first manned launch of the Saturn IB launch vehicle, and the first three-person US space mission. The crew was commanded by Walter M. Schirra, with Command Module Pilot Donn F. Eisele, and Lunar Module Pilot R. Walter Cunningham.The mission was the first manned test of the redesigned Block II Apollo Command/Service Module. It flew in Earth orbit so the crew could check life-support, propulsion, and control systems."1968 in Space; 1968 Year in Review, UPI.com" Despite tension between the crew and ground controllers, the mission was a technical success, which gave NASA the confidence to launch Apollo 8 around the Moon  two months later. However, the flight would prove to be the last space flight for all of its three crew members. It was also the final manned launch from what was then known as Cape Kennedy Air Force Station, Florida.
Crew{{Spaceflight crew}}
Backup crew{{Spaceflight crew}}
Mission highlightsApollo 7 was a test flight, and confidence-builder. After the January 1967 Apollo launch pad fire, the Apollo Command Module had been extensively redesigned. Schirra, who would be the only astronaut to fly Mercury, Gemini and Apollo missions, commanded this Earth-orbital shakedown of the Command and Service Modules. Since it was not carrying a Lunar Module and only needed to reach a low earth orbit, Apollo 7 could be launched with the Saturn IB booster rather than the much larger and more powerful Saturn V. Schirra wanted to name the Apollo 7 Command module "Phoenix" (the mythical bird rising from its own ashes) in memory of the late Apollo 1 crew, but NASA management rejected the idea.Throughout the Mercury and Gemini programs, McDonnell Aircraft engineer Guenter Wendt had been leader of the spacecraft launch pad teams, with ultimate responsibility for condition of the spacecraft at launch. He had come to be respected and admired by all the astronauts, including Schirra. But since the Apollo contractor had been changed from McDonnell to North American Rockwell, Wendt had not been pad leader for Apollo 1.So adamant was Schirra in his desire to have Wendt back as Pad Leader for his Apollo flight, that he got his boss Deke Slayton to persuade North American management to hire Wendt away from McDonnell, and Schirra personally lobbied North American's launch operations manager to change Wendt's shift from midnight to day so he could be pad leader for Apollo 7. So Wendt remained as Pad Leader for the entire Apollo program.{{Cite book}}Wendt's face was the last they saw before the hatch was sealed, and immediately after liftoff Eisele said with a mock German accent into his radio, "I vonder vere Guenter Vendt?"The Apollo hardware and all mission operations worked without any significant problems, and the Service Propulsion System (SPS), the all-important engine that would place Apollo into and out of lunar orbit, made eight nearly perfect firings.Even though Apollo's larger cabin was more comfortable than Gemini's, 11 days in orbit took its toll on the astronauts. Tension with Schirra began with the launch decision, when flight managers decided to launch with a less than ideal abort option for the early part of the ascent. Once in orbit, the spacious cabin may have induced some crew motion sickness, which had not been an issue in the earlier, smaller spacecraft. The crew was also unhappy with their food selections. But the worst problem occurred when Schirra developed a severe head cold. As a result, he became irritable with requests from Mission Control and all three astronauts began "talking back" to the Capcom. An early example was this exchange after Mission Control requested that a TV camera be turned on in the spacecraft:

SCHIRRA: You've added two burns to this flight schedule, and you've added a urine water dump; and we have a new vehicle up here, and I can tell you at this point TV will be delayed without any further discussion until after the rendezvous.
CAPCOM (Jack Swigert): Roger. Copy.
SCHIRRA: Roger.
CAPCOM 1 (Deke Slayton): Apollo 7, this is CAPCOM number 1.
SCHIRRA: Roger.
CAPCOM 1: All we've agreed to do on this is flip it. 
SCHIRRA: ... with two commanders, Apollo 7
CAPCOM 1: All we have agreed to on this particular pass is to flip the switch on. No other activity is associated with TV; I think we are still obligated to do that.
SCHIRRA: We do not have the equipment out; we have not had an opportunity to follow setting; we have not eaten at this point. At this point, I have a cold. I refuse to foul up our time lines this way.{{cite web}}

A further source of tension between Mission Control and the crew was that Schirra repeatedly expressed the view that the reentry should be conducted with their helmets off, contrary to previous Project Mercury and Gemini experience. They perceived a risk that their eardrums might burst due to the sinus pressure from their colds, and they wanted to be able to pinch their noses and blow to equalize the pressure as it increased during reentry. This would have been impossible wearing the helmets, as the new Apollo helmets were a continuous "fishbowl" type without a moveable visor, unlike previous helmets. However, on repeat occasions over the course of the mission, Schirra was instructed that the helmets should be worn for safety reasons. In the final exchange on the subject, Mission Control made it clear to Schirra that he would be expected to account for flouting instructions:
CAPCOM Number 1 (Deke Slayton): Okay. I think you ought to clearly understand there is absolutely no experience at all with landing without the helmet on. 
SCHIRRA: And there no experience with the helmet either on that one. 
CAPCOM: That one we've got a lot of experience with, yes. 
SCHIRRA: If we had an open visor, I might go along with that. 
CAPCOM: Okay. I guess you better be prepared to discuss in some detail when we land why we haven't got them on. I think you're too late now to do much about it. 
SCHIRRA: That's affirmative. I don't think anybody down there has worn the helmets as much as we have. 
CAPCOM: Yes. 
SCHIRRA: We tried them on this morning. 
CAPCOM: Understand that. The only thing we're concerned about is the landing. We couldn't care less
about the reentry. But it's your neck, and I hope you don't break it. 
SCHIRRA: Thanks, babe. 
CAPCOM: Over and out.{{cite web}}

Exchanges such as this led to all three Apollo 7 crew members being rejected for future missions.{{cite web}} Despite these difficulties, the mission successfully met its objective of verifying manned flight capability of the Apollo Command and Service Modules, allowing the flight of Apollo 8 to the Moon just two months later.Beyond a shakedown of the spacecraft, goals for the mission included the first live television broadcast from an American spacecraft (Gordon Cooper had broadcast slow scan television pictures from Faith 7 in 1963) and testing the mock LM docking maneuver which involved rendezvous with the launch vehicle's discarded upper stage (referred to by Schirra in the above conversation.)The splashdown point was 27 deg 32 min N, 64 deg 04 min W, {{convert}} SSW of Bermuda and {{convert}} north of the recovery ship USS Essex.Apollo 7 was the only manned Apollo launch to take place from Cape Kennedy Air Force Station's Launch Complex 34.The Air Force Station was originally named Cape Canaveral, but the name was changed to Cape Kennedy by president Lyndon Johnson shortly after Kennedy's death in November 1963. The name Canaveral was reverted in 1973. All subsequent Apollo and Skylab missions (including Apollo-Soyuz) were launched from Launch Complex 39 at the nearby Kennedy Space Center, and Launch Complex 34 was retired.As of 2011, Cunningham is the only surviving member of the crew. Eisele died in 1987 and Schirra in 2007.
Belated recognitionIn October 2008, NASA administrator Michael D. Griffin awarded the crew of Apollo 7 NASA's Distinguished Service Medal, in recognition of their crucial contribution to the Apollo program. They had been the only Apollo and Skylab crew not granted this award. Cunningham was present to accept the medal, as were representatives of his deceased crew members, and other Apollo astronauts including Neil Armstrong, Bill Anders, and Alan Bean. Former Mission Control Flight Director Chris Kraft, who was in conflict with the crew during the mission, also sent a conciliatory video message of congratulations, saying: "We gave you a hard time once but you certainly survived that and have done extremely well since...I am frankly, very proud to call you a friend."
Mission insigniaThe insignia for the flight showed a Command and Service module with its SPS engine firing, the trail from that fire encircling a globe and extending past the edges of the patch symbolizing the Earth-orbital nature of the mission. The Roman numeral VII appears in the South Pacific Ocean and the crew's names appear on a wide black arc at the bottom. The patch was designed by Allen Stevens of Rockwell International.Hengeveld, Ed. The Apollo Emblems of Artist Al Stevens. Spaceflight magazine, June 2008, pp. 220-225.
Spacecraft location
In January 1969, the Apollo 7 Command Module was displayed on a NASA float in the inauguration parade of President Richard M. Nixon. For nearly 30 years the Command Module was on loan (renewable every two years) to the National Museum of Science and Technology, in Ottawa, Ontario, along with the space suit worn by Wally Schirra. In November 2003 the Smithsonian Institution in Washington D.C. requested them back for display at their new annex at the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center. Currently, the Apollo 7 CM is on loan to the Frontiers of Flight Museum located next to Love Field in Dallas, Texas.
Depiction in entertainmentPortions of the Apollo 7 mission are dramatized in the miniseries From the Earth to the Moon episode entitled "We Have Cleared the Tower".
Gallery<gallery>File:Apollo 7 crew during water egress training.jpg|The crew during water egress training
Image:Apollo_7_Launch_-_GPN-2000-001171.jpg|Apollo 7 launch 
Image:As7-3-1545.jpg|Apollo 7 S-IVB rocket stage in orbit
File:Saturn IVB.jpg|S-IVB stage over Sonora, Mexico, during Apollo 7's second revolution around Earth
File:Apollo 7 Rondevouz.jpg|Close-up view of the S-IVB stage during rendezvous maneuvers
File:Saturn-V-Third-Stage-LM-Adapter.jpg|Distant view of the S-IVB stage
Image:Apollo_7_Florida.jpg|View of Florida from Apollo 7 
File:Apollo 7 during the first live television transmission from space.jpg|Television transmission from Apollo 7
File:Apollo 7 recovery with SH-3 Sea King 1968.jpg|A crewmember being hoisted into the recovery helicopter
Image:The Apollo 7 crew is welcomed aboard the USS Essex.jpg|The crew is welcomed aboard the USS Essex
Image:Za?oga Apollo 7 68PC-0211-m.jpg|Crew after recovery aboard USS Essex
</gallery>
See also{{Portal}}

Splashdown (spacecraft landing)


References{{reflist}}
Further reading

NASA NSSDC Master Catalog
APOLLO BY THE NUMBERS: A Statistical Reference by Richard W. Orloff (NASA)
Lattimer, Dick (1985). All We Did was Fly to the Moon. Whispering Eagle Press. ISBN 0-9611228-0-3.
Schirra, Wally with Richard Billings (1988). Schirra's Space. Naval Institute Press. ISBN 1-55750-792-9.


External links

NASA Apollo 7 press kit - Oct 6, 1968
NASA Apollo 7 Mission Report - December 1, 1968 (PDF format)
Apollo 7 entry in Encyclopedia Astronautica
The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronology
Apollo Program Summary Report
Apollo 7 Launch ApolloTV.net Video
{{Apollo program}}{{DEFAULTSORT:Apollo 07}}



ar:????? 7
bg:????? 7
ca:Apollo 7
cs:Apollo 7
cy:Apollo 7
da:Apollo 7
de:Apollo 7
et:Apollo 7
el:??????? 7
es:Apolo 7
fa:????? ?
fr:Apollo 7
ko:??? 7?
id:Apollo 7
it:Apollo 7
he:????? 7
lt:Apollo 7
hu:Apollo–7
ms:Apollo 7
nl:Apollo 7
ja:???7?
no:Apollo 7
nn:Apollo 7
pl:Apollo 7
pt:Apollo 7
ro:Apollo 7
ru:???????-7
sk:Apollo 7
sl:Apollo 7
sr:????? 7
fi:Apollo 7
sv:Apollo 7
tl:Apollo 7
tr:Apollo 7
uk:???????-7
zh:???7?