title{{Infobox Space mission}}Apollo 14 was the eighth manned mission in the American Apollo program, and the third to land on the Moon. It was the last of the "H missions", targeted landings with two-day stays on the Moon with two lunar EVAs, or moonwalks.Commander Alan Shepard, Command Module Pilot Stuart Roosa, and Lunar Module Pilot Edgar Mitchell launched on their nine-day mission on January 31, 1971 at 4:04:02 pm local time after a 40 minute, 2 second delay due to launch site weather restrictions, the first such delay in the Apollo program.http://history.nasa.gov/afj/launchwindow/lw1.html Shepard and Mitchell made their lunar landing on February 5 in the Fra Mauro formation; this had originally been the target of the aborted Apollo 13 mission. During the two lunar EVAs, {{convert}} of Moon rocks were collected and several surface experiments, including seismic studies, were performed. Shepard famously hit two golf balls on the lunar surface with a make-shift club he had brought from Earth. Shepard and Mitchell spent about 33 hours on the Moon, with about 9½ hours on EVA. While Shepard and Mitchell were on the surface, Roosa remained in lunar orbit aboard the Command/Service Module, performing scientific experiments and photographing the Moon. He took several hundred seeds on the mission, many of which were germinated on return resulting in the so-called Moon trees. Shepard, Roosa, and Mitchell landed in the Pacific Ocean on February 9.
Crew{{Spaceflight crew}}Shepard was the oldest U.S. astronaut when he made his trip aboard Apollo 14.{{cite news}}{{cite web}} He is the only astronaut from Project Mercury (the original Mercury Seven astronauts) to reach the Moon. Another of the original seven, L. Gordon Cooper, had originally been scheduled to command the mission, but according to author Andrew Chaikin, his casual attitude toward training, along with problems with NASA hierarchy (reaching all the way back to the Mercury-Atlas 9 flight) resulted in his removal.The mission was a personal triumph for Shepard, who had battled back from Ménière’s disease which grounded him from 1964 to 1968.  He and his crew were originally scheduled to fly on Apollo 13, but in 1969 NASA officials switched the scheduled crews for Apollo 13 and 14.  This was done to place the more experienced Apollo 8 veteran Jim Lovell in command of what would have been the first lunar landing mission had both Apollo 11 and Apollo 12 failed to successfully land.As of 2011, Mitchell is the only surviving member of the crew; Roosa died in 1994 from pancreatitis and Shepard in 1998 from leukemia.
Backup crew{{Spaceflight crew}}The backup crew later flew on Apollo 17. James McDivitt, the commander of Apollo 9, who would have been either the prime crew Lunar Module Pilot or the backup crew commander, was unwilling to take a secondary role in the mission.
Support crew

Philip K. Chapman
Bruce McCandless, II
William R. Pogue
C. Gordon Fullerton


Flight directors

Pete Frank, Orange team
Glynn Lunney, Black team
Milton Windler, Maroon team
Gerry Griffin, Gold team


Mission parameters


Mass: CSM 29,240 kg; LM 15,264 kg
Perigee: 183.2 km
Apogee: 188.9 km
Inclination: 31.12°
Period: 88.18 min



Perilune: 108.2 km
Apolune: 314.1 km
Inclination: °
Period: 120 min
Landing Site: 3.64530° S – 17.47136° W or 3° 38&#39; 43.08&#34; S – 17° 28&#39; 16.90&#34; W
{{clear}}
LM – CSM docking

Undocked: February 5, 1971 – 04:50:43  UTC
Docked: February 6, 1971 – 20:35:42 UTC


EVAs
EVA 1 start: February 5, 1971, 14:42:13 UTC

Shepard  – EVA 1
Stepped onto moon: 14:54 UTC
LM ingress: 19:22 UTC



Mitchell – EVA 1
Stepped onto moon: 14:58 UTC
LM ingress: 19:18 UTC



EVA 1 end: February 5, 19:30:50 UTC
Duration: 4 hours, 47 minutes, 50 seconds


EVA 2 start: February 6, 1971, 08:11:15 UTC


Shepard  – EVA 2
Stepped onto moon: 08:16 UTC
LM ingress: 12:38 UTC



Mitchell – EVA 2
Stepped onto moon: 08:23 UTC
LM ingress: 12:28 UTC



EVA 2 end: February 6, 12:45:56 UTC
Duration: 4 hours, 34 minutes, 41 seconds


Mission highlights
Transfer and descent
At the beginning of the mission, the CSM Kitty Hawk had difficulty achieving capture and docking with the LM Antares. Repeated attempts to dock went on for 1 hour and 42 minutes, until it was suggested that pilot Roosa hold Kitty Hawk against Antares using its thrusters, then the docking probe would be retracted out of the way, hopefully triggering the docking latches. This attempt was successful, and no further docking problems were encountered during the mission.After separating from the command module in lunar orbit, the LM Antares also had two serious problems.  First, the LM computer began getting an ABORT signal from a faulty switch.  NASA believed that the computer might be getting erroneous readings like this if a tiny ball of solder had shaken loose and was floating between the switch and the contact, closing the circuit.  The immediate solution—tapping on the panel next to the switch—did work briefly, but the circuit soon closed again. If the problem recurred after the descent engine fired, the computer would think the signal was real and would initiate an auto-abort, causing the Ascent Stage to separate from the Descent Stage and climb back into orbit.  NASA and the software teams at MIT scrambled to find a solution, and determined the fix would involve reprogramming the flight software to ignore the false signal.  The software modifications were transmitted to the crew via voice communication, and Mitchell manually entered the changes (amounting to over 80 keystrokes on the LM computer pad) just in time.A second problem occurred during the powered descent, when the LM radar altimeter failed to lock automatically onto the moon's surface, depriving the navigation computer of vital information on the vehicle altitude and groundspeed.  This was later determined to be an unintended consequence of the software patch.  After the astronauts cycled the landing radar breaker, the unit successfully acquired a signal near {{convert}}, again just in the nick of time.  Shepard then manually landed the LM closer to its intended target than any of the other six moon landing missions.  Mitchell believes that Shepard would have continued with the landing attempt without the radar, using the LM inertial guidance system and visual cues.   But a post-flight review of the descent data showed the inertial system alone would have been inadequate, and the astronauts probably would have been forced to abort the landing as they approached the surface.
EVAs
Shepard and Mitchell named their landing site Fra Mauro Base, and this designation is recognized by the International Astronomical Union (depicted in Latin on lunar maps as Statio Fra Mauro).Shepard's first words, after taking his first step onto the lunar surface, were "And it's been a long way, but we're here." Unlike Apollo 11's Neil Armstrong and Apollo 12's Pete Conrad, Shepard had already gotten off the ladder and was a few meters from the LM before he spoke.Shepard's moonwalking suit was the first to utilize red bands on the arms and legs and a red stripe on the top of the lunar EVA sunshade "hood", so as to allow easy identification of the commander while on the surface;{{cite journal}} on the Apollo 12 pictures, it had been almost impossible to distinguish between the two crewmen, causing a great deal of confusion. This feature was included on Jim Lovell's Apollo 13 suit, but because of the accident on that mission, it was not used. It was used on the remaining three Apollo flights and is used on both the U.S. and Russian spacesuits on both the Space Shuttle and International Space Station.After landing in the Fra Mauro formation—the destination for Apollo 13—Shepard and Mitchell took two moon walks, adding new seismic studies to the by now familiar Apollo experiment package, and using the modular equipment transporter (MET), a pull cart for carrying equipment and samples, referred to as a "lunar rickshaw". Roosa, meanwhile, took pictures from on board command module Kitty Hawk in lunar orbit.The second moonwalk, or EVA, was intended to reach the rim of the 1,000 foot (300 m) wide Cone Crater.  However, the two astronauts were not able to find the rim amid the rolling terrain of the crater's slopes. Later analysis, using the pictures that they took, determined that they had come within an estimated {{convert}} of the crater's rim. Images from the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter show the tracks of the astronauts and the MET come to within 30&nbsp;m of the rim.{{cite web}}Shepard and Mitchell deployed and activated various scientific instruments and experiments and collected almost 100 pounds (45&nbsp;kg) of lunar samples for return to earth. Other Apollo 14 achievements included: the only use of MET; longest distance traversed by foot on the lunar surface; first use of shortened lunar orbit rendezvous techniques; first use of color TV with new vidicon tube on lunar surface and the first extensive orbital science period conducted during CSM solo operations.The astronauts also engaged in less serious activities. Shepard brought a makeshift six iron golf club and two golf balls to the Moon, and took several swings (one-handed, due to the limited flexibility of the EVA suit). He exuberantly, and somewhat whimsically, exclaimed that the second ball went "miles and miles and miles" in the lunar gravity, but later estimated it actually went {{convert}}.  Mitchell then used a lunar scoop handle as a javelin, creating the first 'Lunar Olympics'. Before the flight, backup crew members Cernan, Evans and Engle played a joke on the astronauts by stashing their own crew patches in every single locker and compartment in the spacecraft. Whenever one of the patches would float out of a locker during the mission, Shepard would say, "Tell Cernan, BEEP-BEEP my ass!"
Return
On the way back to Earth, the crew conducted the first U.S. materials processing experiments in space. The Apollo 14 astronauts were the last lunar explorers to be quarantined on their return from the Moon. Roosa, who worked in forestry in his youth, took several hundred tree seeds on the flight.  These were germinated after the return to Earth, and widely distributed around the world as commemorative Moon Trees.
{{clear}}The command module Kitty Hawk splashed down in the South Pacific Ocean on February 9, 1971 at 21:05 [UTC], approximately {{convert}} south of American Samoa. After recovery by the ship USS New Orleans, the crew was flown to Pago Pago International Airport in Tafuna for a reception before being flown on a C-141 cargo plane to Honolulu.
Mission insignia
The oval insignia shows a gold NASA Astronaut Pin, given to U.S. astronauts upon completing their first space flight, traveling from the Earth to the Moon. A gold band around the edge includes the mission and astronaut names. The designer was Jean Beaulieu. The backup crew spoofed the patch with its own version, with revised artwork showing the Road Runner cartoon character on the moon, holding a U.S. flag and a flag labeled "1st Team," as a gray-bearded (for Shepard, who was 47 at the time of the mission and the oldest man on the Moon), pot bellied (for Mitchell, who had a pudgy appearance), red furred (for Roosa's red hair) Wile E. Coyote flies in place of the astronaut pin. The flight name is replaced by "BEEP BEEP" and the backup crew's names are given.  Several of these patches were hidden in the Kitty Hawk as "gotchas" for the crew to find during the flight.http://www.hq.nasa.gov/alsj/a14/a14beep-beep.html
Spacecraft location
The Apollo 14 Command Module Kitty Hawk is on display at the Saturn V Center building at KSC after being on display at the Astronaut Hall of Fame near Titusville, Florida for several years.The ascent stage of Lunar Module Antares impacted the Moon 7 February 1971 at 00:45:25.7 UT (6 February, 7:45 PM EST) {{Coord}}.  Antares' descent stage and the mission's other equipment remain at Fra Mauro at {{Coord}}.Photographs taken in 2009 by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter were released on July 17, and the Fra Mauro equipment was the most visible Apollo hardware at that time, owing to particularly good lighting conditions. In 2011, the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter returned to the landing site at a lower altitude to take higher resolution photographs.{{cite web}}
Gallery
<gallery>
File:LRO Apollo14 landing site 369228main ap14labeled 540.jpg|Apollo 14 landing site, photograph by LRO.
File:Apollo14LRO2.png|Later photo of landing site taken by LRO.
File:Ap14 flag.ogg|Shepard and Mitchell erect a US flag on the lunar surface.
Image:Apollo 14 Shepard.jpg|Alan Shepard on lunar surface.
</gallery>
See also{{Portal}}

Moon trees, taken from seeds brought to the Moon on Apollo 14.
Extra-vehicular activity
List of spacewalks
Splashdown
List of artificial objects on the Moon
Google Moon


References{{reflist}}
Further reading

NASA NSSDC Master Catalog
APOLLO BY THE NUMBERS: A Statistical Reference by Richard W. Orloff Apollo 14 (NASA)
The Apollo Spacecraft: A Chronology
Apollo Program Summary Report
Apollo 14 Lunar Launch Video
Apollo 14 Characteristics – SP-4012 NASA HISTORICAL DATA BOOK
Lattimer, Dick (1985). &#39;All We Did was Fly to the Moon. Whispering Eagle Press. ISBN 0-9611228-0-3.
NASA Manned Spacecraft Center (1971), &#39;Apollo 14 Technical Air-To-Ground Voice Transcription&#39;
Back-up-Crew Patch


External links{{commons}}

Apollo 14: Shepard, Roosa, Mitchell — slideshow by Life magazine
NASA Apollo 14 press kit – Jan 21, 1971
Map of surface activities for Apollo 14
Apollo 14 entry in Encyclopedia Astronautica
Apollo 14 Science Experiments
Interview with the Apollo 14 Astronauts (March 31, 1971) from the Commonwealth Club of California Records at the Hoover Institution Archives.
Detailed technical article describing the ABORT signal problem and its solution
{{Apollo program}}




ar:????? 14
bg:????? 14
ca:Apollo 14
cs:Apollo 14
cy:Apollo 14
da:Apollo 14
de:Apollo 14
et:Apollo 14
es:Apolo 14
fa:????? ??
fr:Apollo 14
gl:Apollo 14
ko:??? 14?
it:Apollo 14
he:????? 14
hu:Apollo–14
nl:Apollo 14
ja:???14?
no:Apollo 14
pl:Apollo 14
pt:Apollo 14
ro:Apollo 14
ru:???????-14
simple:Apollo 14
sk:Apollo 14
sl:Apollo 14
sr:????? 14
fi:Apollo 14
sv:Apollo 14
ta:???????? 14
th:??????? 14
tr:Apollo 14
uk:???????-14
zh:???14?