title{{dablink}}
{{Infobox writer}}
Apuleius ({{IPAc-en}}; sometimes called Lucius Apuleius; c. 125 – c. 180) was a Latin prose writer. He was a Berber,"Berbers : ... The best known of them were the Roman author Apuleius, the Roman emperor Septimius Severus, and St. Augustine", Encyclopedia Americana, Scholastic Library Publishing, 2005, v.3, p.569 from Madaurus (now M'Daourouch, Algeria). He studied Platonist philosophy in Athens; travelled to Italy, Asia Minor and Egypt; and was an initiate in several cults or mysteries. The most famous incident in his life was when he was accused of using magic to gain the attentions (and fortune) of a wealthy widow. He declaimed and then distributed a witty tour de force in his own defense before the proconsul and a court of magistrates convened in Sabratha, near Tripoli. This is known as the Apologia.His most famous work is his bawdy picaresque novel, the Metamorphoses, otherwise known as The Golden Ass. It is the only Latin novel that has survived in its entirety. It relates the ludicrous adventures of one Lucius, who experiments with magic and is accidentally turned into a donkey.
LifeApuleius was born in Madaurus (now M'Daourouch, Algeria), a Roman colony in Numidia on the North African coast, bordering Gaetulia, and he described himself as "half-Numidian half-Gaetulian."Apuleius, Apology, 24 Madaurus was the same colonia where Saint Augustine later received part of his early education, and, though located well away from the Romanized coast, is today the site of some pristine Roman ruins. As to his first name, no praenomen is given in any ancient source;P. G. Walsh, (1999) The Golden Ass, page xi. Oxford University Press. late-medieval manuscripts began the tradition of calling him Lucius from the name of the hero of his novel.Julia Haig Gaisser, (2008), The fortunes of Apuleius and the Golden Ass: a study in transmission and Reception, page 69. Princeton University Press. Details regarding his life come mostly from his defense speech (Apology) and his work Florida, which consists of snippets taken from some of his best speeches. His father was a provincial magistrate (duumvir) who bequeathed at his death the sum of nearly two millions of sesterces to his two sons.Apuleius, Apology, 23 Apuleius studied with a master at Carthage (where he later settled) and later at Athens, where he studied Platonist philosophy among other subjects. He subsequently went to RomeApuleius, Florida, 17.4 to study Latin oratory and, most likely, to declaim in the law courts for a time before returning to his native North Africa. He also travelled extensively in Asia Minor and Egypt, studying philosophy and religion, burning up his inheritance while doing so.Apuleius was an initiate in several cults or mysteries, including the Dionysian mysteries,As he proudly claims in his Apologia. (Winter, Thomas Nelson (2006) Apology as Prosecution: The Trial of Apuleius) and the cult of Isis.{{citation needed}} He was a priest of AesculapiusApuleius, Florida 16.38 and 18.38 and, according to Augustine,Augustine, Epistle 138.19. sacerdos provinciae Africae (i.e. priest of the province of Carthage).Not long after his return home he set out upon a new journey to Alexandria.Apuleius, Apology, 72. On his way there he was taken ill at the town of Oea (modern-day Tripoli) and was hospitably received into the house of Sicinius Pontianus, with whom he had been friends when he had studied in Athens. The mother of Pontianus, Pudentilla, was a very rich widow. With her son's consent – indeed encouragement – Apuleius agreed to marry her.Apuleius, Apology, 73 Meanwhile Pontianus himself married the daughter of one Herennius Rufinus;  he, indignant that Pudentilla's wealth should pass out of the family, instigated his son-in-law, together with a younger brother, Sicinius Pudens, a mere boy, and their paternal uncle, Sicinius Aemilianus, to join him in impeaching Apuleius upon the charge that he had gained the affections of Pudentilla by charms and magic spells.Apuleius, Apology, 53, 66, 70, etc The case was heard at Sabratha, near Tripoli, c. 158 CE, before Claudius Maximus, proconsul of Africa.Apuleius, Apology, 1, 59, 65 The accusation itself seems to have been ridiculous, and the spirited and triumphant defence spoken by Apuleius is still extant. This is known as  the Apologia (A Discourse on Magic).Of his subsequent career we know little. Judging from the many works of which he was author, he must have devoted himself assiduously to literature. He occasionally gave speeches in public with great applause; he had the charge of exhibiting gladiatorial shows and wild beast events in the province, and statues were erected in his honour by the senate of Carthage and of other senates.Apuleius, Apology, 55, 73; Florida, iii. n. 16; Augustine, Ep. v.
Works
The Golden Ass{{Main}}
The Golden Ass (Asinus Aureus) or Metamorphoses is the only Latin novel that has survived in its entirety. It is an imaginative, irreverent, and amusing work that relates the ludicrous adventures of one Lucius, who experiments with magic and is accidentally turned into an ass. In this guise he hears and sees many unusual things, until escaping from his predicament in a rather unexpected way. Within this frame story are found multiple digressions, the longest among them being the well-known tale of Cupid and Psyche.The Metamorphoses ends with the (once again human) hero, Lucius, eager to be initiated into the mystery cult of Isis; he abstains from forbidden foods, bathes and purifies himself. He is introduced to the Navigium Isidis. Then the secrets of the cult's books are explained to him, and further secrets revealed  before going through the process of initiation which involves a trial by the elements in a journey to the underworld. Lucius is then asked to seek initiation into the cult of Osiris in Rome, and eventually is initiated into the pastophoroi—a group of priests that serves Isis and  Osiris.Iles Johnson, Sarah, Mysteries, in Ancient Religions pp. 104–5, The Belknap Press of Harvard University (2007), ISBN 978-0-674-02548-6
Other worksHis other works are:

Apologia (A Discourse on Magic). Apuleius&#39; courtroom defense. The work has very little to do with magic, and a lot to do with making mincemeat of his opponents, with hilarity and panache. It is among the funniest works that have come down to us from Antiquity, and one of the most entertaining examples of Latin courtroom oratory to survive.



Florida. A compilation of twenty-three extracts from his various speeches and lectures.



On Plato and his Doctrine. An outline in two books of Plato&#39;s physics and ethics, preceded by a life of Plato



De Deo Socratis (On the God of Socrates). A work on the existence and nature of daemons, the intermediaries between gods and humans. This treatise was roughly attacked by Augustine.  It contains a passage comparing gods and kings which is the first recorded occurrence of the proverb &#34;familiarity breeds contempt&#34;:{{citation}}{{quote}}



On the Universe. This Latin translation of the work De Mundo is probably by Apuleius.

Apuleius wrote many other works which have not survived. He wrote works of poetry and fiction, as well as technical treatises on politics, dendrology, agriculture, medicine, natural history, astronomy, music, and arithmetic, and he translated Plato's Phaedo.P. G. Walsh, (1999) The Golden Ass, pages xiv–xv. Oxford University Press.
Spurious worksThe extant works wrongly attributed to Apuleius are:Mark P. O. Morford, (2002), The Roman philosophers, page 227. Routledge.

On interpretation (Peri Hermeneias). A brief Latin version of a guide to Aristotelian logic.
Asclepius. A Latin paraphrase of a lost Greek dialogue (The perfect discourse) featuring Asclepius and Hermes Trismegistus.


Apuleian SphereThe Apuleian Sphere, also known as 'Columcille's Circle' or 'Petosiris's Circle' {{cite web}} is a magical prognosticating device for predicting the survival of a patient.{{cite journal}}
Footnotes{{Reflist}}
References

Carl C. Schlam, The Metamorphoses of Apuleius: On Making an Ass of Oneself (Chapel Hill-London, 1992).
Gerald Sandy, The Greek World of Apuleius: Apuleius and the Second Sophistic (Leiden, Brill, 1997).
Finkelpearl, Ellen D. Metamorphosis of Language in Apuleius: A Study of Allusion in the Novel (Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press, 1998).
O. Pecere, A. Stramaglia, Studi apuleiani. Note di aggiornamento di L. Graverini (Cassino: Edizioni dell&#39; Università degli Studi di Cassino, 2003).
Lucia Pasetti, Plauto in Apuleio (Bologna:  Patron Editore, 2007).
Frangoulidis, Stavros. Witches, Isis and narrative: approaches to magic in Apuleius' Metamorphoses (Berlin; New York: Walter de Gruyter, 2008) (Trends in classics – Supplementary volumes, 2).


External links{{wikiquote}}
{{Commons category}}
{{wikisource author}}

Apuleius (123–180 CE) the Famous Berber writer
Apulei Opera (Latin texts of all the surviving works of Apuleius) at The Latin Library
English translation of Florida by H. E. Butler (PDF)
English translation of the Apologia by H. E. Butler
English translation of the God of Socrates by Thomas Taylor
English translation of the Apologia by H. E. Butler (PDF)
Apuleius – Apologia: Seminar (Latin text of the Apologia with H. E. Butler&#39;s English translation and an English crib with discussion and commentary)
Apology as Prosecution: The Trial of Apuleius
Apuleius' works: text, concordances and frequency list
{{gutenberg author}}
{{OL author}}

{{Persondata}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:Apuleius}}














{{Link FA}}ar:?????? ???????
bn:???????? ?????????
bg:??????
ca:Luci Appuleu
cs:Lucius Apuleius
co:Apuleiu
da:Apulejus fra Madaura
de:Apuleius
et:Apuleius
el:?????????
es:Apuleyo
eo:Apuleo
eu:Apuleio
fa:???????
fr:Apulée
gl:Apuleio
ko:??????
hy:????????
hr:Apulej
id:Apuleius
is:Apuleius
it:Apuleio
he:?????? ????????
la:Lucius Apuleius
hu:Lucius Apuleius
ml:????????
nl:Lucius Apuleius Madaurensis
ja:??????
no:Lucius Apuleius Platonicus
pl:Apulejusz (pisarz)
pt:Apuleio
ro:Apuleius
ru:??????
scn:Apuleiu
sk:Lucius Apuleius
sr:??????
sh:Apulej
fi:Apuleius
sv:Lucius Apuleius
tl:Apuleius
kab:Apuleius
uk:??????
diq:Apuleius
zh:?????