title{{Wiktionary}}
{{TOCright}}
Aquila is the Latin and Romance language word for eagle and may also refer to:
Signs and symbols

Aquila (Roman), a Roman military standard
Latin name for the Eagle (heraldry)


Places

L'Aquila, sometimes Aquila, the regional capital of Abruzzo in Italy
Province of L'Aquila, Italy
Aquila d'Arroscia, a commune of Italy
Aquila, Switzerland, former municipality in the canton of Ticino in Switzerland
Aquila, Michoacán, town in Michoacán, Mexico
Aquila, Veracruz, municipality in Veracruz, Mexico


People

Aquila, a Neapolitan surname


Ancient

Aquila (of Priscilla and Aquila), a prominent New Testament couple who assisted Paul of Tarsus
Aquila of Sinope, second-century translator of the Old Testament
Aquila Romanus, a 3rd century Latin grammarian
Pontius Aquila, 1st century B.C. tribune
Gaius Furius Sabinius Aquila Timesitheus, 3rd century Roman knight


Medieval and renaissance

Caspar Aquila, 16th century German reformer
Serafino dell' Aquila, 15th century Italian poet
Peter of Aquila, 14th century Italian theologian
Pietro Aquila, 17th century Italian painter
Nicholas de Aquila, 13th century bishop
Richard II of Aquila, 12th century nobleman


Modern and recent

Frank Aquila, a Manitoba judge
Frank J. Aquila, an American lawyer
Alberto Aquilani, Italian footballer
Samuel Joseph Aquila, Roman Catholic bishop


Science

Aquila (constellation), the astronomical constellation The Eagle
Beta Aquilae, a star in the constellation Aquila
Zeta Aquilae, a star system in Aquila
Eta Aquilae, a star in Aquila
Lambda Aquilae, a star in Aquila
Aquila (Chinese astronomy), a traditional constellation
Aquila (genus), a genus of birds including some eagles
Aquila (journal), an ornithological journal
Macroglossum aquila, a species of moth
Balanus aquila, a species of barnacle


Arts and entertainment
Literature

A book by Andrew Norriss
Aquila (children's magazine), a children&#39;s magazine


Television

Aquila (TV series), a BBC TV production for children based on the Norriss book


Music

A song in the video game Ace Combat 04: Shattered Skies.  In supplemental materials, the official designation of the enemy Yellow Squadron is Aquila Squadron
Aquila Suite – 12 Arpeggio Concert Etudes for Solo Piano, a piano composition


Games

A game server in the MMORPG MapleStory
Captain Crowe Almedio&#39;s ship in the video game Star Ocean: The Last Hope
Symbol of the Imperium (Warhammer 40,000) in the fictional Warhammer 40,000 universe
Aquila pattern power armour is the most commonly used type of power armour in the Space Marines inventory
The Aquila Lander is a light shuttle used by the Imperial Navy


Theatre

Aquila Theatre, a theatre company currently of New York


Vehicles
Maritime vessels

USS Aquila (AK-47), an Aquila-class cargo ship commissioned by the U.S. Navy for service in World War II
USS Aquila (PHM-4), a hydrofoil formerly operated by the U.S. Navy
Italian aircraft carrier Aquila, a World War II Italian aircraft carrier


Aircraft

The Lockheed MQM-105 Aquila, the U.S. Army&#39;s first UAV for reconnaissance
Hyosung Aquila: a series of cruiser motorcycles made by Hyosung Motors & Machinery Inc.
Aquila AT01, a light weight training aircraft built in Germany
Gary fisher Aquila bicycle
Bristol Aquila, an aircraft engine
Angus Aquila, a British aircraft
Aquila A 210, a German aircraft


Automobiles

&#34;The Aquila&#34; Coachbuild futuristic car based on the Austin Maxi. Styled by Chris Field after winning competition, organised by the Daily Telegraph and the Institute of British Coachbuilders and Motor Manufactures in 1972


Organisations

Aquila Airways, a British flying boat operator (1948–1958)
Aquila, Inc., a former electric and gas utility in Kansas City, Missouri, United States
Aquila Italiana, Italian car manufacturer or brand
Aquila Capital, an independent investment firm in Hamburg, Germany
Aquila Legis, a Filipino fraternity
Aquila Polonica, a U.S. publishing firm
Aquila racing cars, a Danish firm


Other

Aquila Court Building of Omaha, Nebraska
Aquila Private Game Reserve, South Africa
Santi Aquila e Priscilla, a Roman Catholic church
Roman Catholic Archdiocese of L'Aquila, a Roman Catholic archdiocese


See also

Aquilla (disambiguation)
Aguila (disambiguation)
Aquilinus (disambiguation)

{{disambiguation}}

br:Aquila
bg:??????
ca:Aquila
cs:Aquila
de:Aquila
es:Aquila
eo:Aquila
eu:Aquila
fr:Aquila
gl:Aquila (homónimos)
hr:Aquila
it:Aquila (disambigua)
la:Aquila (discretiva)
lb:Aquila
hu:Aquila (egyértelm?sít? lap)
nl:Aquila
ja:????
pt:Aquila (desambiguação)
ro:Acvila (dezambiguizare)
ru:??????
sk:Aquila
sl:Aquila
sv:Aquila
tr:Kartal (anlam ayr?m?)
uk:?'?????? (????????)