title{{redirect}}
{{redirect}}
{{Infobox Religious group}}
{{Arminianism}}
Arminianism (also called Reformed Arminian tradition, the Reformed Arminian faith, or Reformed Arminian theology) is a school of soteriological thought within Protestant Christianity based on the theological ideas of the Dutch Reformed theologian Jacobus Arminius (1560–1609)Magnusson, Magnus (ed). Chambers Biographical Dictionary (Chambers: Cambridge University Press, 1995) 62 and his historic followers, the Remonstrants. The doctrine's acceptance stretches through much of Christianity from the early arguments between Athanasius and Origen, to Augustine of Hippo's defense of "original sin." Dutch Arminianism was originally articulated in the Remonstrance (1610), a theological statement signed by 45 ministers and submitted to the Dutch states general. The Synod of Dort (1618–19) was called by the states general to pass upon the Remonstrance. The five points of the Remonstrance asserted that: 

election (and condemnation on the day of judgment) was conditioned by the rational faith or nonfaith of man; 
the Atonement, while qualitatively adequate for all men, was efficacious only for the man of faith; 
unaided by the Holy Spirit, no person is able to respond to God’s will; 
grace is not irresistible; and 
believers are able to resist sin but are not beyond the possibility of falling from grace. 
The crux of Remonstrant Arminianism lay in the assertion that human dignity requires an unimpaired freedom of the will.http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/35372/ArminianismSince the 16th century, Christians of many sects including the Baptists (See A History of the Baptists Third Edition by Robert G. Torbet) have been influenced by Arminian views. So have the Methodists, the Congregationalists of the early New England colonies in the 17th and 18th centuries, and the Universalists and Unitarians in the 18th and 19th centuries.Arminianism is most accurately used to define those who affirm the original beliefs of Jacobus Arminius himself, but the term can also be understood as an umbrella for a larger grouping of ideas including those of Hugo Grotius, John Wesley and others.  There are two primary perspectives on how the system is applied in detail: Classical Arminianism, which sees Arminius as its figurehead, and Wesleyan Arminianism, which sees John Wesley as its figurehead. Wesleyan Arminianism is sometimes synonymous with Methodism. In addition, Arminianism is often misrepresented by some of its critics to include Semipelagianism or even Pelagianism, though proponents of both primary perspectives vehemently deny these claims.Olson, Roger E. Arminian Theology: Myths and Realities (Downers Grove: Intervarsity Press, 2006) 17–18, 23, 80–82, 142–145, 152Within the broad scope of the history of Christian theology, Arminianism is closely related to Calvinism (or Reformed theology), and the two systems share both history and many doctrines. Nonetheless, they are often viewed as rivals within evangelicalism because of their disagreement over details of the doctrines of divine predestination and salvation.Gonzalez, Justo L. The Story of Christianity, Vol. Two: The Reformation to the Present Day (New York: Harpercollins Publishers, 1985; reprint – Peabody: Prince Press, 2008) 180
History{{Main}}Jacobus Arminius was a Dutch pastor and theologian in the late 16th and early 17th centuries. He was taught by Theodore Beza, Calvin's hand-picked successor, but after examination of the Scriptures, he rejected his teacher's theology that it is God who unconditionally elects some for salvation. Instead Arminius proposed that the election of God was of believers, thereby making it conditional on faith. Arminius's views were challenged by the Dutch Calvinists, especially Franciscus Gomarus, but Arminius died before a national synod could occur.{{Citation needed}}Arminius's followers, not wanting to adopt their leader's name, called themselves the Remonstrants. When Arminius died before he could satisfy Holland's State General's request for a 14-page paper outlining his views, the Remonstrants replied in his stead crafting the Five articles of Remonstrance. After some political maneuvering, the Dutch Calvinists were able to convince Prince Maurice of Nassau to deal with the situation. Maurice systematically removed Arminian magistrates from office and called a national synod at Dordrecht. This Synod of Dort was open primarily to Dutch Calvinists (Arminians were excluded) with Calvinist representatives from other countries, and in 1618 published a condemnation of Arminius and his followers as heretics. Part of this publication was the famous Five points of Calvinism in response to the five articles of Remonstrance.  Arminians across Holland were removed from office, imprisoned, banished, and sworn to silence. Twelve years later Holland officially granted Arminianism protection as a religion, although animosity between Arminians and Calvinists continued.The debate between Calvin's followers and Arminius's followers is distinctive of post-Reformation church history. The emerging Baptist movement in 17th-century England, for example, was a microcosm of the historic debate between Calvinists and Arminians. The first Baptists–called "General Baptists" because of their confession of a "general" or unlimited atonement, were Arminians.Gonzalez, Justo L. The Story of Christianity, Vol. 2: The Reformation to the Present Day (HarperCollins Publishers, 1985; reprint – Peabody: Prince Press, 2008) 225–226 The Baptist movement originated with Thomas Helwys, who left his mentor John Smyth, who had moved into semi-Pelgianism and other distinctives of the Dutch Waterlander Mennonites of Amsterdam, and returned to London to start the first English Baptist Church in 1611. Later General Baptists such as John Griffith, Samuel Loveday, and Thomas Grantham defended a Reformed Arminian theology that reflected more the Arminianism of Arminius than that of the later Remonstrants or the English Arminianism of Arminian Puritans like John Goodwin or Anglican Arminians such as Jeremy Taylor and Henry Hammond. The General Baptists encapsulated their Arminian views in numerous confessions, the most influential of which was the Standard Confession of 1660. In the 1640s the Particular Baptists were formed, diverging strongly from Arminian doctrine and embracing the strong Calvinism of the Presbyterians and Independents. Their robust Calvinism was publicized in such confessions as the London Baptist Confession of 1644 and the Second London Confession of 1689. Interestingly, the London Confession of 1689 was later used by Calvinistic Baptists in America (called the Philadelphia Baptist Confession), whereas the Standard Confession of 1660 was used by the American heirs of the English General Baptists, who soon came to be known as Free Will Baptists.This same dynamic between Arminianism and Calvinism can be seen in the heated discussions between friends and fellow Methodist ministers John Wesley and George Whitefield. Wesley was a champion of Arminian teachings, defending his soteriology in a periodical titled The Arminian and writing articles such as Predestination Calmly Considered. He defended Arminianism against charges of semi-Pelagianism, holding strongly to beliefs in original sin and total depravity. At the same time, Wesley attacked the determinism that he claimed characterized unconditional election and maintained a belief in the ability to lose salvation. Wesley also clarified the doctrine of prevenient grace and preached the ability of Christians to attain to perfection. While Wesley freely made use of the term "Arminian," he did not self-consciously root his soteriology in the theology of Arminius but was highly influenced by 17th-century English Arminianism and thinkers such as John Goodwin, Jeremy Taylor and Henry Hammond of the Anglican "Holy Living" school, and the Remonstrant Hugo Grotius.
Current landscapeAdvocates of both Arminianism and Calvinism find a home in many Protestant denominations, and sometimes both exist within the same denomination as with the Puritans. Faiths leaning at least in part in the Arminian direction include Methodists, Free Will Baptists, General Baptists, Church of the Nazarene, The Salvation Army, and Charismatics. Denominations leaning in the Calvinist direction are grouped as the Reformed churches and include Particular Baptists, Reformed Baptists, Presbyterians, and Congregationalists. The majority of Southern Baptists, including Billy Graham, accept Arminianism with an exception allowing for a doctrine of perseverance of the saints ("eternal security")."The Baptist Faith and Message, 2000 Revision"Harmon, Richard W. Baptists and Other Denominations (Nashville: Convention Press, 1984) 17–18, 45–46Dongell, Joseph and Walls, Jerry Why I Am Not a Calvinist (Downer's Grove: Intervarsity Press, 2004) 12–13, 16–17 Many see Calvinism as growing in acceptance,Dongell 7–20 and some prominent Reformed Baptists, such as Albert Mohler and Mark Dever, have been pushing for the Southern Baptist Convention to adopt a more Calvinistic orientation. Lutherans espouse a view of salvation and election distinct from both the Calvinist and Arminian schools of soteriology.The current scholarly support for Arminianism is wide and varied. One particular thrust is a return to the teachings of Arminius. F. Leroy Forlines, Robert Picirilli, Stephen Ashby and Matthew Pinson (see citations) are four of the more prominent supporters. Forlines has referred to this type of Arminianism as "Classical Arminianism," while Picirilli, Pinson, and Ashby have termed it "Reformation Arminianism" or "Reformed Arminianism."  Through Methodism, Wesley's teachings also inspire a large scholarly following, with vocal proponents including J. Kenneth Grider, Stanley Hauerwas, Thomas Oden, Thomas Jay Oord, and William Willimon.Recent influence of the New Perspective on Paul movement has also reached Arminianism — primarily through a view of corporate election. The New Perspective scholars propose that the 1st century, Second Temple Judaism understood election primarily as national (Israelites) and racial (Jews), not as individual. Their conclusion is thus that Paul's writings on election should be interpreted in a similar corporate light.
Theology{{Five Articles}}
Arminian theology usually falls into one of two groups — Classical Arminianism, drawn from the teaching of Jacobus Arminius — and Wesleyan Arminian, drawing primarily from Wesley. Both groups overlap substantially.
Classical ArminianismClassical Arminianism (sometimes titled Reformed Arminianism or Reformation Arminianism) is the theological system that was presented by Jacobus Arminius and maintained by some of the Remonstrants;Ashby, Stephen "Reformed Arminianism" Four Views on Eternal Security (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2002), 137 its influence serves as the foundation for all Arminian systems. A list of beliefs is given below:

Depravity is total: Arminius states &#34;In this [fallen] state, the free will of man towards the true good is not only wounded, infirm, bent, and weakened; but it is also imprisoned, destroyed, and lost. And its powers are not only debilitated and useless unless they be assisted by grace, but it has no powers whatever except such as are excited by Divine grace.&#34;Arminius, James The Writings of James Arminius (three vols.), tr. James Nichols and William R. Bagnall (Grand Rapids: Baker, 1956), I:252
Atonement is intended for all: Jesus&#39;s death was for all people, Jesus draws all people to himself, and all people have opportunity for salvation through faith.Arminius I:316
Jesus's death satisfies God's justice: The penalty for the sins of the elect is paid in full through Jesus&#39;s work on the cross. Thus Christ&#39;s atonement is intended for all, but requires faith to be effected. Arminius states that &#34;Justification, when used for the act of a Judge, is either purely the imputation of righteousness through mercy… or that man is justified before God… according to the rigor of justice without any forgiveness.&#34;Arminius III:454 Stephen Ashby clarifies: &#34;Arminius allowed for only two possible ways in which the sinner might be justified: (1) by our absolute and perfect adherence to the law, or (2) purely by God&#39;s imputation of Christ&#39;s righteousness.&#34;Ashby Four Views, 140
Grace is resistible: God takes initiative in the salvation process and His grace comes to all people. This grace (often called prevenient or pre-regenerating grace) acts on all people to convince them of the Gospel, draw them strongly towards salvation, and enable the possibility of sincere faith. Picirilli states that &#34;indeed this grace is so close to regeneration that it inevitably leads to regeneration unless finally resisted.&#34; Picirilli, Robert Grace, Faith, Free Will: Contrasting Views of Salvation: Calvinism and Arminianism (Nashville: Randall House Publications, 2002), 154ff The offer of salvation through grace does not act irresistibly in a purely cause-effect, deterministic method but rather in an influence-and-response fashion that can be both freely accepted and freely denied.Forlines, Leroy F., Pinson, Matthew J. and Ashby, Stephen M. The Quest for Truth: Answering Life's Inescapable Questions (Nashville: Randall House Publications, 2001), 313–321
Man has free will to respond or resist: Free will is limited by God&#39;s sovereignty, but God&#39;s sovereignty allows all men the choice to accept the Gospel of Jesus through faith, simultaneously allowing all men to resist.
Election is conditional: Arminius defined election as &#34;the decree of God by which, of Himself, from eternity, He decreed to justify in Christ, believers, and to accept them unto eternal life.&#34;Arminius Writings, III:311 God alone determines who will be saved and his determination is that all who believe Jesus through faith will be justified. According to Arminius, &#34;God regards no one in Christ unless they are engrafted in him by faith.&#34;
God predestines the elect to a glorious future: Predestination is not the predetermination of who will believe, but rather the predetermination of the believer&#39;s future inheritance. The elect are therefore predestined to sonship through adoption, glorification, and eternal life.Pawson, David Once Saved, Always Saved? A Study in Perseverance and Inheritance (London: Hodder & Staughton, 1996), 109ff
Christ's righteousness is imputed to the believer: Justification is sola fide. When individuals repent and believe in Christ (saving faith), they are regenerated and brought into union with Christ, whereby the death and righteousness of Christ are imputed to them for their justification before God.Forlines, F. Leroy, Classical Arminianism: A Theology of Salvation, ch. 6
Eternal security is also conditional: All believers have full assurance of salvation with the condition that they remain in Christ. Salvation is conditioned on faith, therefore perseverance is also conditioned.Picirilli Grace, Faith, Free Will 203 Apostasy (turning from Christ) is only committed through a deliberate, willful rejection of Jesus and renunciation of saving faith. Such apostasy is irremediable.Picirilli 204ff

The Five articles of Remonstrance that Arminius's followers formulated in 1610 state the above beliefs regarding (I) conditional election, (II) unlimited atonement, (III) total depravity, (IV) total depravity and resistible grace, and (V) possibility of apostasy. Note, however, that the fifth article did not completely deny perseverance of the saints; Arminius, himself, said that "I never taught that a true believer can… fall away from the faith… yet I will not conceal, that there are passages of Scripture which seem to me to wear this aspect; and those answers to them which I have been permitted to see, are not of such as kind as to approve themselves on all points to my understanding."Arminius Writings, I:254 Further, the text of the Articles of Remonstrance says that no believer can be plucked from Christ's hand, and the matter of falling away, "loss of salvation" required further study before it could be taught with any certainty.The core beliefs of Jacobus Arminius and the Remonstrants are summarized as such by theologian Stephen Ashby:

Prior to being drawn and enabled, one is unable to believe… able only to resist.
Having been drawn and enabled, but prior to regeneration, one is able to believe… able also to resist.
After one believes, God then regenerates; one is able to continue believing… able also to resist.
Upon resisting to the point of unbelief, one is unable again to believe… able only to resist.Ashby Four Views, 159


Wesleyan Arminianism{{Methodism}}
{{See}}
John Wesley has historically been the most influential advocate for the teachings of Arminian soteriology. Wesley thoroughly agreed with the vast majority of what Arminius himself taught, maintaining strong doctrines of original sin, total depravity, conditional election, prevenient grace, unlimited atonement, and possibly apostasy.Wesley departs from Classical Arminianism primarily on three issues:

Atonement – Wesley&#39;s atonement is a hybrid of the penal substitution theory and the governmental theory of Hugo Grotius, a lawyer and one of the Remonstrants. Steven Harper states &#34;Wesley does not place the substitionary element primarily within a legal framework...Rather [his doctrine seeks] to bring into proper relationship the &#39;justice&#39; between God&#39;s love for persons and God&#39;s hatred of sin...it is not the satisfaction of a legal demand for justice so much as it is an act of mediated reconciliation.&#34; Harper, Steven "Wesleyan Arminianism" Four Views on Eternal Security (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2002) 227ff
Possibility of apostasy – Wesley fully accepted the Arminian view that genuine Christians could apostatize and lose their salvation, as his famous sermon &#34;A Call to Backsliders&#34; clearly demonstrates. Harper summarizes as follows: &#34;the act of committing sin is not in itself ground for the loss of salvation...the loss of salvation is much more related to experiences that are profound and prolonged. Wesley sees two primary pathways that could result in a permanent fall from grace: unconfessed sin and the actual expression of apostasy.&#34; Harper 239–240 Wesley disagrees with Arminius, however, in maintaining that such apostasy was not final. When talking about those who have made &#34;shipwreck&#34; of their faith (1 Tim 1:19), Wesley claims that &#34;not one, or a hundred only, but I am persuaded, several thousands...innumerable are the instances...of those who had fallen but now stand upright.&#34;Wesley, John "A Call to Backsliders" The Works of John Wesley, ed. Thomas Jackson, 14 vols. (London: Wesley Methodist Book Room, 1872; repr, Grand Rapids: Baker, 1986) 3:211ff
Christian perfection – According to Wesley&#39;s teaching, Christians could attain a state of practical perfection, meaning a lack of all voluntary sin by the empowerment of the Holy Spirit, in this life. Christian perfection (or entire sanctification), according to Wesley, is &#34;purity of intention, dedicating all the life to God&#34; and &#34;the mind which was in Christ, enabling us to walk as Christ walked.&#34; It is &#34;loving God with all our heart, and our neighbor as ourselves&#34;.Wesley, John "A Plain Account of Christian Perfection", Works It is &#39;a restoration not only to the favour, but likewise to the image of God,&#34; our &#34;being filled with the fullness of God&#34;.Wesley, John "The End of Christ’s Coming", Works Wesley was clear that Christian perfection did not imply perfection of bodily health or an infallibility of judgment. It also does not mean we no longer violate the will of God, for involuntary transgressions remain. Perfected Christians remain subject to temptation, and have continued need to pray for forgiveness and holiness. It is not an absolute perfection but a perfection in love. Furthermore, Wesley did not teach a salvation by perfection, but rather says that, &#34;Even perfect holiness is acceptable to God only through Jesus Christ.&#34;


Other variationsSince the time of Arminius, his name has come to represent a very large variety of beliefs. Some of these beliefs, such as Pelagianism and semi-Pelagianism (see below) are not considered to be within Arminian orthodoxy and are dealt with elsewhere. Some doctrines, however, do adhere to the Arminian foundation and, while minority views, are highlighted below.
Open theism{{Main}}The doctrine of open theism states that God is omnipresent, omnipotent, and omniscient, but differs on the nature of the future. Open theists claim that the future is not completely knowable because people have not made their decisions yet, and therefore God knows the future in possibilities rather than certainties. As such, open theists resolve the issue of human free will and God's sovereignty by claiming that God is sovereign because he does not ordain each human choice, but rather works in cooperation with his creation to bring about his will. This notion of sovereignty and freedom is foundational to their understanding of love since open theists believe that love is not genuine unless it is freely chosen. The power of choice under this definition has the potential for as much harm as it does good, and open theists see free will as the best answer to the problem of evil. Well-known proponents of this theology are Greg Boyd, Clark Pinnock, Thomas Jay Oord, William Hasker, and John E. Sanders.Some Arminians, such as professor and theologian Robert Picirilli, reject the doctrine of open theism as a "deformed Arminianism".Picirilli, Grace, Faith, Free Will, 40 – Picirilli actually objects so strongly to the link between Arminianism and Open theism that he devotes an entire section to his objections. See 59ff. Joseph Dongell stated that "open theism actually moves beyond classical Arminianism towards process theology."Dongell, Joseph and Walls, Jerry Why I Am Not a Calvinist, 45 There are also some Arminians, like Roger Olson, who believe Open theism to be an alternative view that a Christian can have. The majority Arminian view accepts classical theism – the belief that God's power, knowledge, and presence have no external limitations, that is, outside of His divine nature. Most Arminians reconcile human free will with God's sovereignty and foreknowledge by holding three points:

Human free will is limited by original sin, though God&#39;s prevenient grace restores to humanity the ability to accept God&#39;s call of salvation.Picirilli, Grace, Faith, Free Will, 42–43, 59ffAshby, Four Views on Eternal Security, 146–147
God purposely exercises his sovereignty in ways that do not illustrate its extent – in other words, He has the power and authority to predetermine salvation but he chooses to apply it through different means.
God&#39;s foreknowledge of the future is exhaustive and complete, and therefore the future is certain and not contingent on human action. God does not determine the future, but He does know it. God&#39;s certainty and human contingency are compatible.Picirilli, Grace, Faith, Free Will, 40


Corporate view of election{{Further}}The majority Arminian view is that election is individual and based on God's foreknowledge of faith, but a second perspective deserves mention. These Arminians reject the concept of individual election entirely, preferring to understand the doctrine in corporate terms. According to this corporate election, God never chose individuals to elect to salvation, but rather He chose to elect the believing church to salvation. Dutch Reformed theologian Herman Ridderbos says "[The certainty of salvation] does not rest on the fact that the church belongs to a certain "number", but that it belongs to Christ, from before the foundation of the world. Fixity does not lie in a hidden decree, therefore, but in corporate unity of the Church with Christ, whom it has come to know in the gospel and has learned to embrace in faith."Ridderbos, Herman Paul: An Outline of His Theology trans. John Richard de Witt (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1975), 350–351Corporate election draws support from a similar concept of corporate election found in the Old Testament and Jewish law. Indeed most biblical scholarship is in agreement that Judeo-Greco-Roman thought in the 1st century was opposite of the Western world's "individual first" mantra – it was very collectivist or communitarian in nature.Abasciano, Brian Paul’s Use of the Old Testament in Romans 9:1–9: An Intertextual and Theological Exegesis (T&T Clark Publishers, 2006), ISBN 0-567-03073-3 Identity stemmed from membership in a group more than individuality. According to Romans 9–11, supporters claim, Jewish election as the chosen people ceased with their national rejection of Jesus as Messiah. As a result of the new covenant, God's chosen people are now the corporate body of Christ, the church (sometimes called spiritual Israel – see also Covenant theology). Pastor and theologian Dr. Brian Abasciano claims "What Paul says about Jews, Gentiles, and Christians, whether of their place in God’s plan, or their election, or their salvation, or how they should think or behave, he says from a corporate perspective which views the group as primary and those he speaks about as embedded in the group. These individuals act as members of the group to which they belong, and what happens to them happens by virtue of their membership in the group."These scholars also maintain that Jesus was the only human ever elected and that individuals must be "in Christ" (Eph 1:3–4) through faith to be part of the elect. This was, in fact, Swiss Reformed theologian, Karl Barth's, understanding of the doctrine of election. Joseph Dongell, professor at Asbury Theological Seminary, states "the most conscipuous feature of Ephesians 1:3–2:10 is the phrase 'in Christ', which occurs twelve times in Ephesians 1:3–4 alone...this means that Jesus Christ himself is the chosen one, the predestined one. Whenever one is incorporated into him by grace through faith, one comes to share in Jesus' special status as chosen of God."Dongell, Joseph and Walls, Jerry Why I am Not a Calvinist, 76 Markus Barth illustrates the inter-connectedness: "Election in Christ must be understood as the election of God's people. Only as members of that community do individuals share in the benefits of God's gracious choice."Barth, Markus Ephesians (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 1974), 108
Arminianism and other views
{{further}}Understanding Arminianism is aided by understanding the theological alternatives: Pelagianism, Semi-Pelagianism, and Calvinism. Arminianism, like any major belief system, is frequently misunderstood both by critics and would-be supporters. Listed below are a few common misconceptions.



Comparison among Protestants
This table summarizes the classical views of three different Protestant beliefs about salvation.Table drawn from, though not copied, from Lange, Lyle W. God So Loved the World: A Study of Christian Doctrine. Milwaukee: Northwestern Publishing House, 2006. p. 448.







Common misconceptions

Arminianism supports works-based salvation – No well-known system of Arminianism denies salvation &#34;by faith alone&#34; and &#34;by faith first to last&#34;. This misconception is often directed at the Arminian possibility of apostasy, which critics maintain requires continual good works to achieve final salvation. To Arminians, however, both initial salvation and eternal security are &#34;by faith alone&#34;; hence &#34;by faith first to last&#34;. Belief through faith is the condition for entrance into the Kingdom of God; unbelief is the condition for exit from the Kingdom of God – not a lack of good works.Pawson Once Saved, Always Saved? 121–124Picirilli Grace, Faith, Free Will 160ffAshby Four Views on Eternal Security 142ff



Arminianism is Pelagian (or Semi-Pelagian), denying original sin and total depravity – No system of Arminianism founded on Arminius or Wesley denies original sin or total depravity;Ashby 138–139 both Arminius and Wesley strongly affirmed that man&#39;s basic condition is one in which he cannot be righteous, understand God, or seek God.Arminius, Writings 2:192  Many Calvinist critics of Arminianism, both historically and currently, claim that Arminianism condones, accepts, or even explicitly supports Pelagianism or Semi-Pelagianism. Arminius referred to Pelagianism as &#34;the grand falsehood&#34; and stated that he &#34;must confess that I detest, from my heart, the consequences [of that theology].&#34;Arminius Writings, II:219ff (the entire treatise occupies pages 196–452) David Pawson, a British pastor, decries this association as &#34;libelous&#34; when attributed to Arminius&#39; or Wesley&#39;s doctrine.Pawson Once Saved, Always Saved?, 106 Indeed most Arminians reject all accusations of Pelagianism; nonetheless, primarily due to Calvinist opponents,Pawson 97–98, 106Picirilli Grace, Faith, Free Will, 6ff the two terms remain intertwined in popular usage.



Arminianism denies Jesus' substitutionary payment for sins – Both Arminius and Wesley believed in the necessity and sufficiency of Christ&#39;s atonement through penal substitution.Picirilli Grace, Faith, Free Will 104–105, 132ff Arminius held that God&#39;s justice was satisfied individually,Ashby Four Views on Eternal Security 140ff while Hugo Grotius and many of Wesley&#39;s followers taught that it was satisfied governmentally.Picirilli Grace, Faith, Free Will 132


Comparison with Calvinism{{Main}}
Ever since Arminius and his followers revolted against Calvinism in the early 17th century, Protestant soteriology has been largely divided between Calvinism and Arminianism. The extreme of Calvinism is hyper-Calvinism, which insists that signs of election must be sought before evangelization of the unregenerate takes place and that the eternally damned have no obligation to repent and believe, and on the extreme of Arminianism is Pelagianism, which rejects the doctrine of original sin on grounds of moral accountability; but the overwhelming majority of Protestant, evangelical pastors and theologians hold to one of these two systems or somewhere in between.
Similarities

Total depravity – Arminians agree with Calvinists over the doctrine of total depravity. The differences come in the understanding of how God remedies this human depravity.
Substitutionary effect of atonement – Arminians also affirm with Calvinists the substitutionary effect of Christ&#39;s atonement and that this effect is limited only to the elect. Classical Arminians would agree with Calvinists that this substitution was penal satisfaction for all of the elect, while most Wesleyan Arminians would maintain that the substitution was governmental in nature.


Differences

Nature of election – Arminians hold that election to eternal salvation has the condition of faith attached. The Calvinist doctrine of unconditional election states that salvation cannot be earned or achieved and is therefore not conditional upon any human effort, so faith is not a condition of salvation but the divinely apportioned means to it. In other words, Arminians believe that they owe their election to their faith, whereas Calvinists believe that they owe their faith to their election.
Nature of grace – Arminians believe that, through grace, God restores free will concerning salvation to all humanity, and each individual, therefore, is able either to accept the Gospel call through faith or resist it through unbelief. Calvinists hold that God&#39;s grace to enable salvation is given only to the elect and irresistibly leads to salvation.
Extent of the atonement – Arminians, along with four-point Calvinists or Amyraldians, hold to a universal drawing and universal extent of atonement instead of the Calvinist doctrine that the drawing and atonement is limited in extent to the elect only, which many Calvinists prefer to call &#39;particular redemption&#39;.Spurgeon, Charles Haddon Both sides (with the exception of hyper-Calvinists) believe the invitation of the gospel is universal and &#34;must be presented to everyone [they] can reach without any distinction.&#34;Nicole, Roger, "Covenant, Universal Call And Definite Atonement" Journal of the Evangelical Theological Society 38:3 (September 1995)
Perseverance in faith – Arminians believe that future salvation and eternal life is secured in Christ and protected from all external forces but is conditional on remaining in Christ and can be lost through apostasy. Traditional Calvinists believe in the doctrine of the perseverance of the saints, which says that because God chose some unto salvation and actually paid for their particular sins, he keeps them from apostasy and that those who do apostatize were never truly regenerated (that is, born again) or saved. Non-traditional Calvinists and other evangelicals advocate the similar but different doctrine of eternal security that teaches if a person was once saved, his or her salvation can never be in jeopardy, even if the person completely apostatizes.


See also{{Portal box}}


Arminian Doctrines

Total depravity
Prevenient grace
Unlimited atonement
Substitutionary atonement
Penal satisfaction atonement
Governmental atonement
Free will
Conditional election
Conditional preservation of the saints
 
People, history, denominations

Jacobus Arminius
Hugo Grotius
The Remonstrants
Methodism
John Wesley
Charles Wesley
Pentecostalism and Charismatics
General and Free Will Baptists
History of Calvinist–Arminian debate
 
Opposing Views

Calvinism
Five points of Calvinism
John Calvin
Unconditional election
Limited atonement
Irresistible grace
Perseverance of the saints
Free Grace theology
Lordship salvation controversy
 

Notes{{Reflist}}
Further reading{{ref begin}}

{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite journal}}
{{cite journal}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
Wesley, John. "The Question, 'What Is an Arminian?' Answered by a Lover of Free Grace"
Witski, Steve. "Free Grace or Forced Grace?" from The Arminian Magazine, Spring 2001
Satama, Mikko (2009). "Aspects of Arminian Soteriology in Methodist-Lutheran Ecumenical Dialogues in 20th and 21st Century" Master&#39;s Thesis, University of Helsinki, Faculty of Theology.
{{ref end}}
External links

The Works of Jacob Arminius
The Society of Evangelical Arminians
What is an Arminian? by John Wesley
Sermon #58: "On Predestination" by John Wesley
"Corporate Election in Romans 9", Journal of the Evangelical Theological Society, June 2006 by Brian Abasciano (Arminian perspective)
The Nature of Wesleyan Theology by J. Kenneth Grider (Arminian perspective)
Characteristics of Wesley's Arminianism by Luke L. Keefer, Jr. (Arminian perspective)
Wesleyan Theology: Arminianism by Gregory S. Neal (from a Methodist perspective)
Arminianism from the Catholic Encyclopedia
Christian Cyclopedia article on Arminianism (Lutheran perspective)
{{-}}
{{Christianityfooter}}





bg:????????????
cs:Arminianismus
cy:Arminiaeth
de:Arminianismus
el:?????????????
es:Arminianismo
fr:Arminianisme
ko:????????
id:Arminianisme
ia:Arminianismo
it:Arminianesimo
lb:Arminianismus
lt:Arminijonai
nl:Arminianisme
ja:????????
no:Arminianisme
nn:Arminianisme
pl:Arminianizm
pt:Arminianismo
ru:????????????
sl:Arminijanci
fi:Arminiolaisuus
sv:Arminianism
zh:?????