title{{Infobox Disease}}
{{Distinguish}}
Arthritis (from Greek arthro-, joint + -itis, inflammation; plural: arthritides) is a form of joint disorder that involves inflammation of one or more joints.thefreedictionary.com > arthritis in turn citing:
 There are over 100 different forms of arthritis.HealthlineWeb MD The most common form, osteoarthritis (degenerative joint disease), is a result of trauma to the joint, infection of the joint, or age. Other arthritis forms are rheumatoid arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and related autoimmune diseases. Septic arthritis is caused by joint infection.The major complaint by individuals who have arthritis is joint pain. Pain is often a constant and may be localized to the joint affected.
The pain from arthritis is due to inflammation that occurs around the joint, damage to the joint from disease, daily wear and tear of joint, muscle strains caused by forceful movements against stiff, painful joints and fatigue.
ClassificationThere are several diseases where joint pain is primary, the main feature. Generally when a person has "arthritis" it means that they have one of these diseases. The primary diseases include:

Ankylosing spondylitis
Gout and pseudo-gout
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Osteoarthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Septic arthritis
Still's disease

Joint pain can also be a symptom of other diseases. In this case, the arthritis is considered to be secondary to the main disease. Diseases that have arthritis as a secondary feature include:

Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome
Familial Mediterranean fever
Haemochromatosis
Henoch-Schönlein purpura
Hepatitis
Hyperimmunoglobulinemia D with recurrent fever
Inflammatory bowel disease (Including Crohn's Disease and Ulcerative Colitis)
Lyme disease
Psoriatic arthritis
Reactive arthritis
Sarcoidosis
TNF receptor associated periodic syndrome
Wegener's granulomatosis (and many other vasculitis syndromes)

{{anchor}}
An undifferentiated arthritis is an arthritis that does not fit into well-known clinical disease categories, possibly being an early stage of a definite rheumatic disease.{{cite pmid}}
Signs and symptoms

Extra-articular features of joint diseaseSwash, M, Glynn, M.(eds). 2007. Hutchison's Clinical Methods. Edinburgh. Saunders Elsevier. 
Cutaneous nodules 
Cutaneous vasculitis lesions 
Lymphadenopathy 
Oedema 
Ocular inflammation 
Urethritis 
Tenosynovitis (tendon sheath effusions) 
Bursitis (swollen bursa) 
Diarrhea 
Orogenital ulceration Regardless of the type of arthritis, the common symptoms for all arthritis disorders include varied levels of pain, swelling, joint stiffness, and sometimes a constant ache around the joint(s). Arthritic disorders like lupus and rheumatoid can also affect other organs in the body with a variety of symptoms.Arthritis: The Nation’s Most Common Cause of Disability Centers for disease prevention and health promotion. Retrieved on 2010-01-24

Inability to use the hand or walk
Malaise and a feeling of tiredness
Fever
Weight loss
Poor sleep
Muscle aches and pains
Tenderness
Difficulty moving the joint

It is common in advanced arthritis for significant secondary changes to occur. For example, in someone who has limited their physical activity:

Muscle weakness
Loss of flexibility
Decreased aerobic fitness
These changes can also impact on life and social roles, such as community involvement.
DisabilityArthritis is the most common cause of disability in the USA.^ Arthritis: The Nation’s Most Common Cause of Disability Centers for disease prevention and health promotion. Retrieved on 2010-01-24 More than 20 million individuals with arthritis have severe limitations in function on a daily basis. Absenteeism and frequent visits to the physician are common in individuals who have arthritis. Arthritis makes it very difficult for individuals to be physically active and many become home bound.Chronic Arthritis treatment, symptoms and relief Retrieved on 2010-01-24It is estimated that the total cost of arthritis cases is close to $100 billion of which nearly 50% accounts from lost earnings. Each year, arthritis results in nearly 1 million hospitalizations and close to 45 million outpatient visits to health care centers.Types of Arthritis The Arthritis Society. Retrieved on 2010-02-05Arthritis can make it very difficult for the individual to remain physically active, contributing to an increased risk of obesity, high cholesterol or vulnerability to heart disease. Individuals with arthritis are also at increased risk of depression, which may be related to fear of worsening symptoms.
DiagnosisDiagnosis is made by clinical examination from an appropriate health professional, and may be supported by other tests such as radiology and blood tests, depending on the type of suspected arthritis. All arthritides potentially feature pain. Pain patterns may differ depending on the arthritides and the location. Rheumatoid arthritis is generally worse in the morning and associated with stiffness; in the early stages, patients often have no symptoms after a morning shower. Osteoarthritis, on the other hand, tends to be worse after exercise. In the aged and children, pain might not be the main presenting feature; the aged patient simply moves less, the infantile patient refuses to use the affected limb.Elements of the history of the disorder guide diagnosis. Important features are speed and time of onset, pattern of joint involvement, symmetry of symptoms, early morning stiffness, tenderness, gelling or locking with inactivity, aggravating and relieving factors, and other systemic symptoms. Physical examination may confirm the diagnosis, or may indicate systemic disease. Radiographs are often used to follow progression or help assess severity.
Differential diagnosis
OsteoarthritisOsteoarthritis is the most common form of arthritis.{{cite journal}} It can affect both the larger and the smaller joints of the body, including the hands, feet, back, hip or knee. The disease is essentially one acquired from daily wear and tear of the joint; however, osteoarthritis can also occur as a result of injury. Osteoarthritis begins in the cartilage and eventually causes the two opposing bones to erode into each other. Initially, the condition starts with minor pain while walking but soon the pain can be continuous and even occur at night. The pain can be debilitating and prevent one from doing some activities. Osteoarthritis typically affects the weight bearing joints such as the back, spine, and pelvis. Unlike rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis is most commonly a disease of the elderly. More than 30 percent of females have some degree of osteoarthritis by age 65. Risk factors for osteoarthritis include: prior joint trauma, obesity, and a sedentary lifestyle.Osteoarthritis, like rheumatoid arthritis, cannot be cured, but one can prevent the condition from worsening. Physical therapy to strengthen muscles and joints is very helpful. Pain medications are widely required by individuals with osteoarthritis. For some patients, weight loss can reduce the stress on the joints. When the disease is far advanced and the pain is continuous, surgery may be an option. Unlike rheumatoid arthritis, joint replacement does help many individuals with osteoarthritis.{{cite journal}}
Rheumatoid arthritisRheumatoid arthritis is a disorder in which the body's own immune system starts to attack body tissues. The attack is not only directed at the joint but to many other parts of the body. In rheumatoid arthritis, most damage occurs to the joint lining and cartilage which eventually results in erosion of two opposing bones. Rheumatoid arthritis often affects joints in the fingers, wrists, knees and elbows. The disease is symmetrical (appears on both sides of the body) and can lead to severe deformity in a few years if not treated. Rheumatoid arthritis occurs mostly in people aged 20 and above. In children, the disorder can present with a skin rash, fever, pain, disability, and limitations in daily activities. Often, it is not clear why the rheumatoid arthritis occurred. With earlier diagnosis and aggressive treatment, many individuals can lead a decent quality of life. The drugs to treat rheumatoid arthritis range from corticosteroids to monoclonal antibodies given intravenously. The latest drugs like Remicade can significantly improve quality of life in the short term. In rare cases, surgery may be required to replace joints but there is no cure for the illness.Chronic Diseases Australian Institute Of Health And Welfare. Retrieved on 2010-01-24
LupusThis is a common collagen vascular disorder that can be present with severe arthritis. Other features of lupus include a skin rash, extreme photosensitivity, hair loss, kidney problems, lung fibrosis and constant joint pain.{{EMedicine}}
GoutGout is caused by deposition of uric acid crystals in the joint, causing inflammation. There is also an uncommon form of gouty arthritis caused by the formation of rhomboid crystals of calcium pyrophosphate known as pseudogout. In the early stages, the gouty arthritis usually occur in one joint, but with time, it can occur in many joints and be quite crippling. The joints in gout can often become swollen and lose function.Arthritis Disease Facts Retrieved on 2010-02-05

Comparison of some major forms of arthritisUnless otherwise specified in table box, the reference is: {{cite book}}
 Osteoarthritis  Rheumatoid arthritis  Gouty arthritis 
Speed of onset Months  Weeks-monthsDiagnosis lag time of median 4 weeks, and median diagnosis lag time of 18 weeks, taken from: {{cite pmid}}  Hours for an attack{{cite book}} 
Main locations Weight-bearing joints (such as knees, hips, vertebral column) and hands Hands (proximal interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joint) wrists, ankles and knees Great toe, ankles, knees and elbows 
Inflammation No  Yes  Yes 
Radiologic changes 

Narrowed joint space
Osteophytes
Local osteosclerosis
Subchondral cysts
 

Narrowed joint space
Bone erosions
 

&#34;Punched out&#34; bone erosions
 
Laboratory findings None  Anemia and elevated ESR, rheumatoid factor and C-Reactive Protein (CRP) Crystal in joints 
Other features 

No systemic signs
Bouchard's and Heberden's nodes
 

Extra-articular features are common
Ulnar deviation, swan neck- and Boutonniere deformity of the hand
 

Tophi
Nephrolithiasis
 

OtherInfectious arthritis is another severe form of arthritis. It presents with sudden onset of chills, fever and joint pain. The condition is caused by bacteria elsewhere in the body. Infectious arthritis must be rapidly diagnosed and treated promptly to prevent irreversible and permanent joint damage.Severe Arthritis Disease Facts Retrieved on 2010-02-05Psoriasis can develop into psioritic arthritis. With psoriatic arthritis, most individuals develop the skin problem first and then the arthritis. The typical features are of continuous joint pains, stiffness and swelling. The disease does recur with periods of remission but there is no cure for the disorder. A small percentage develop a severe painful and destructive form of arthritis which destroys the small joints in the hands and can lead to permanent disability and loss of hand function.Psoriatic Arthritis Mayo Clinic. Retrieved on 2010-02-05
TreatmentThere is no cure for either rheumatoid or osteoarthritis. Treatment options vary depending on the type of arthritis and include physical therapy, lifestyle changes (including exercise and weight control), orthopedic bracing, medications. Joint replacement surgery may be required in eroding forms of arthritis. Medications can help reduce inflammation in the joint which decreases pain. Moreover, by decreasing inflammation, the joint damage may be slowed.How to treat arthritis Retrieved on 2010-02-01
Physical therapyIn general, studies have shown that physical exercise of the affected joint can have noticeable improvement in terms of long-term pain relief. Furthermore, exercise of the arthritic joint is encouraged to maintain the health of the particular joint and the overall body of the person.{{cite pmid}}Individuals with arthritis can benefit from both physical and occupational therapy. In arthritis the joints become stiff and the range of movement can be limited. Physical therapy has been shown to significantly improve function, decrease pain, and delay need for surgical intervention in advanced cases.{{cite journal}} Exercise prescribed by a physical therapist has been shown to be more effective than medications in treating osteoarthritis of the knee. Exercise often focuses on improving muscle strength, endurance and flexibility. In some cases, exercises may be designed to train balance. Occupational therapy can teach you how to reduce stress on your joint from daily living activities. Occupation therapy can also teach you how to modify your home and work environment so that you do reduce movements that may worsen your arthritis. There are also assist devices available that can help you drive, getting a bath, dressing and also in housekeeping labors.Occupational therapy can help you do everyday activities without worsening pain or causing joint damage. The techniques can help you distribute pressures to minimize stress on any one joint. Ways to accomplish daily living tasks are made easier.Arthritis Disability Information Centers for disease control and prevention portal. Retrieved on 2010-02-01
MedicationsThere are several types of medications that are used for the treatment of arthritis. Treatment typically begins with medications that have the fewest side effects with further medications being added if insufficiently effective.{{Cite web}} Treatment also depends on the type of the arthritis. For example, the first-line treatment for osteoarthritis is acetaminophen while for inflammatory arthritis it involves non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like ibuprofen.
EpidemiologyArthritis is predominantly a disease of the elderly, but children can also be affected by the disease. More than 70% of individuals in North America affected by arthritis are over the age of 65. Arthritis is more common in women than men at all ages and affects all races, ethnic groups and cultures. In the United States a CDC survey based on data from 2007–2009 showed 22.2% (49.9 million) of adults aged ?18 years had self-reported doctor-diagnosed arthritis, and 9.4% (21.1 million or 42.4% of those with arthritis) had arthritis-attributable activity limitation (AAAL). With an aging population this number is expected to increase.{{cite web}}based on {{cite journal}}
HistoryWhile evidence of primary ankle (kaki) osteoarthritis has been discovered in dinosaurs, the first known traces of human arthritis date back as far as 4500 BC. In early reports, arthritis was frequently referred to as the most common ailment of prehistoric peoples.{{cite journal}} It was noted in skeletal remains of Native Americans found in Tennessee and parts of what is now Olathe, Kansas. Evidence of arthritis has been found throughout history, from Ötzi, a mummy (circa 3000 BC) found along the border of modern Italy and Austria, to the Egyptian mummies circa 2590 BCArthritis History Medical NewsIn 1715 William Musgrave published the second edition of his most important medical work De arthritide symptomatica which concerned arthritis and its effects.Alick Cameron, "Musgrave, William (1655–1721)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, Sept 2004Blood tests and X-rays of the affected joints often are performed to make the diagnosis. Screening blood tests are indicated if certain arthritides are suspected. These might include: rheumatoid factor, antinuclear factor (ANF), extractable nuclear antigen, and specific antibodies.
See also

Arthritis Care (charity in the UK)
Arthritis Foundation (US not-for-profit)
Knee arthritis
Osteoimmunology


References{{Reflist}}
External links

{{dmoz}}
American College of Rheumatology – US professional society of rheumatologists
Arthritis Foundation – US national not-for-profit organization for arthritis

{{Diseases of the musculoskeletal system and connective tissue}}
{{Inflammation}}




ar:?????? ???????
bs:Artritis
ca:Artritis
cy:Gwynegon
de:Arthritis
es:Artritis
eo:Artrito
fa:??????
fr:Arthrite
ko:???
io:Artrito
ia:Arthritis
it:Artrite
he:???? ?????
kn:???????
ka:???????
lb:Giicht
ml:?????????
ms:Artritis
nl:Artritis
ja:???
no:Leddgikt
km:???????????????????????????????
pl:Zapalenie stawów
pt:Artrite
ru:??????
simple:Arthritis
fi:Niveltulehdus
sv:Ledinflammation
tl:Artritis (kalagayan)
th:????????????
tr:Artrit
uk:??????
ur:???? ????
zh:???