title{{for}}
{{confused}}
An artist is a person engaged in one or more of any of a broad spectrum of activities related to creating art, practicing the arts and/or demonstrating an art.  The common usage in both everyday speech and academic discourse is a practitioner in the visual arts only.  The term is often used in the entertainment business, especially in a business context, for musicians and other performers (less often for actors).  "Artiste" (the French for artist) is a variant used in English only in this context.  Use of the term to describe writers, for example, is certainly valid, but less common, and mostly restricted to contexts like criticism.
Dictionary definitionsWiktionary defines the noun 'artist' (Singular: artist; Plural: artists) as follows: 

A person who creates art.
A person who creates art as an occupation.
A person who is skilled at some activity.
The Oxford English Dictionary defines the older broad meanings of the term "artist":


A learned person or Master of Arts
One who pursues a practical science, traditionally medicine, astrology, alchemy, chemistry
A follower of a pursuit in which skill comes by study or practice
A follower of a manual art, such as a mechanic
One who makes their craft a fine art
One who cultivates one of the fine arts – traditionally the arts presided over by the muses

A definition of Artist from Princeton.edu: creative person (a person whose creative work shows sensitivity and imagination).
History of the termAlthough the Greek word "techn?" is often mistranslated as "art," it actually implies mastery of any sort of craft. The Latin-derived form of the word is "tecnicus", from which the English words technique, technology, technical are derived.In Greek culture each of the nine Muses oversaw a different field of human creation:

Calliope (the &#39;beautiful of speech&#39;): chief of the muses and muse of epic or heroic poetry
Clio (the &#39;glorious one&#39;): muse of history
Erato (the &#39;amorous one&#39;): muse of love or erotic poetry, lyrics, and marriage songs
Euterpe (the &#39;well-pleasing&#39;): muse of music and lyric poetry
Melpomene (the &#39;chanting one&#39;): muse of tragedy
Polyhymnia or Polymnia (the &#39;[singer] of many hymns&#39;): muse of sacred song, oratory, lyric, singing and rhetoric
Terpsichore (the &#39;[one who] delights in dance&#39;): muse of choral song and dance
Thalia (the &#39;blossoming one&#39;): muse of comedy and bucolic poetry
Urania (the &#39;celestial one&#39;): muse of astronomy

No muse was identified with the visual arts of painting and sculpture. In ancient Greece sculptors and painters were held in low regard, somewhere between freemen and slaves, their work regarded as mere manual labour.In Our Time: The Artist BBC Radio 4, TX 28th March 2002The word art is derived from the Latin "ars", which, although literally defined means, "skill method" or "technique", holds a connotation of beauty.During the Middle Ages the word artist already existed in some countries such as Italy, but the meaning was something resembling craftsman, while the word artesan was still unknown. An artist was someone able to do a work better than others, so the skilled excellency was underlined, rather than the activity field. In this period some "artisanal" products (such as textiles) were much more precious and expensive than paintings or sculptures.The first division into major and minor arts dates back to Leon Battista Alberti's works (De re aedificatoria, De statua, De pictura), focusing the importance of intellectual skills of the artist rather than the manual skills (even if in other forms of art there was a project behind).P.Galloni, Il sacro artefice. Mitologie degli artigiani medievali, Laterza, Bari, 1998With the Academies in Europe (second half of 16th century) the gap between fine and applied arts was definitely set.Many contemporary definitions of "artist" and "art" are highly contingent on culture, resisting aesthetic prescription, in much the same way that the features constituting beauty and the beautiful, cannot be standardized easily without corruption into kitsch.
The present day concept of an 'artist'Artist is a descriptive term applied to a person who engages in an activity deemed to be an art. An artist also may be defined unofficially as "a person who expresses him- or herself through a medium". The word is also used in a qualitative sense of, a person creative in, innovative in, or adept at, an artistic practice.Most often, the term describes those who create within a context of the fine arts or 'high culture', activities such as drawing, painting, sculpture, acting, dancing, writing, filmmaking, photography, and music—people who use imagination, talent, or skill to create works that may be judged to have an aesthetic value. Art historians and critics define artists as those who produce art within a recognized or recognizable discipline.  Contrasting terms for highly-skilled workers in media in the applied arts or decorative arts include artisan, craftsman, and specialized terms such as potter, goldsmith or glassblower.  Fine arts artists such as painters succeeded in the Renaissance in raising their status, formerly similar to these workers, to a decisively higher level, but in the 20th century the distinction became rather less relevant {{Citation needed}}.The term may be also used loosely or metaphorically to denote highly skilled people in any non-"art" activities, as well— law, medicine, mechanics, or mathematics, for example.Often, discussions on the subject focus on the differences among "artist" and "technician", "entertainer" and "artisan", "fine art" and "applied art", or what constitutes art and what does not. The French word artiste (which in French, simply means "artist") has been imported into the English language where it means a performer (frequently in Music Hall or Vaudeville). Use of the word "artiste" can also be a pejorative term.Kenneth G. Wilson. The Columbia guide to standard American English.The English word 'artiste' has thus, a narrower range of meaning than the word 'artiste' in French.
Examples of art and artists{{MultiCol}}

Abstract Art: Wassily Kandinsky
Abstract expressionism: Jackson Pollock
Action painting: Willem de Kooning
Actor: Marlon Brando
Actress: Greta Garbo
Animation: Chuck Jones
Appropriation art: Marcel Duchamp
Architect: I.M. Pei
Art Deco: Erté
Art Nouveau: Louis Comfort Tiffany
Assemblage: Joseph Cornell
Ballet: Margot Fonteyn
Baroque Art: Caravaggio
BioArt: Hunter Cole
Calligraphy: Rudolf Koch
Cartoons: Carl Barks
Caricature: Honoré Daumier
Ceramic art: Peter Voulkos
Choreography: Martha Graham
Collage: Hannah Höch
Color Field: Mark Rothko
Colorist: Josef Albers
Comics: Will Eisner
Composing: Giuseppe Verdi
Conceptual art: Sol LeWitt
Cubism: Pablo Picasso
Dada: Man Ray
Dance: Isadora Duncan
Decollage: Mimmo Rotella
Design: Arne Jacobsen
Digital art: David Em
Doll Maker: Greer Lankton
{{ColBreak}}

Expressionism: Edvard Munch
Fashion design: Yves Saint Laurent
Fashion illustration: Joel Resnicoff
Fauvist: Henri Matisse
Fiction writing: Virginia Woolf
Film directing: Jean-Luc Godard
Fluxus: George Maciunas
Fumage: Burhan Dogancay
Game design: Peter Molyneux
Geometric abstraction: Piet Mondrian
Genius: Leonardo da Vinci
Graphic design: Milton Glaser
Happening: Allan Kaprow
Hard-edge painting: Theo van Doesburg
Horticulture: André le Nôtre
Illustrations: Quentin Blake
Impressionist: Claude Monet
Industrial design: Frank Lloyd Wright
Installation art: Christo and Jeanne-Claude
Instrumental performance: André Rieu
Jewelry: Fabergé
Landscape architecture: Frederick Law Olmsted
Light art: Dan Flavin
Minimalist art: Donald Judd
Mosaics: Elaine M Goodwin
Murals: Diego Rivera
Musical instrument assemblage: Stradivari
Musician: John Lennon
Neo-impressionism: Paul Signac
New Media art: Ken Feingold
Non Fiction writing: Germaine Greer
{{ColBreak}}

Op Art: Bridget Riley
Oration: Cicero
Ornithology: John James Audubon
Outsider art: Howard Finster
Painting: Rembrandt van Rijn
Performance Art: Carolee Schneemann
Photography: Ansel Adams
Playwriting: Edward Albee
Poetry: Emily Dickinson
Pointillism: Georges Seurat
Pop Art: Andy Warhol
Posters: Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec
Post-Impressionism: Vincent van Gogh
Pottery: Bernard Leach
Printmaking: Albrecht Dürer
Realism: Ilya Repin
Renaissance art: Michelangelo Buonarotti
Rococo: Antoine Watteau
Sculpture: Auguste Rodin
Singing: Odetta
Songwriting: Joni Mitchell
Street Art: Banksy
Suprematism: Kazimir Malevich
Surrealism: Salvador Dalí
Theater: William Shakespeare
Theater arts: Robert Edmond Jones
Tragedy: Sophocles
Typography: Eric Gill
Ukiyo-e: Hokusai
Vedette: Susana Giménez
Video Art: Bill Viola
Wildlife Art: Rembrandt Bugatti
{{EndMultiCol}}
See also{{portal}}

Art
Art history
Arts by region
Artist in Residence
Baluchistan Artists
Fine art
Humanities
List of painters by name
List of painters
List of composers
List of sculptors
Mathematics and art
Social sciences


Notes{{reflist}}
References

P.Galloni, Il sacro artefice. Mitologie degli artigiani medievali, Laterza, Bari, 1998
C. T. Onions (1991). The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary. Clarendon Press Oxford. ISBN 0-19-861126-9

{{Wiktionary}}
{{wikiquote}}
{{Sister project links}}




zh-min-nan:G?-su?t-ka
bo:????????
ca:Artista
cs:Um?lec
cy:Arlunydd
da:Kunstner
de:Künstler
es:Artista
eo:Artisto
fa:??????
fr:Artiste
fy:Keunstner
gl:Artista
io:Artisto
id:Seniman
ia:Artista
iu:??????????/takuminaqliuqtut
it:Artista
he:??? (?????)
la:Artifex
lt:Artistas
lmo:Artista
mr:??????
ms:Artis
nl:Artiest
ja:???
no:Kunstner
nn:Kunstnar
uz:Musavvir
pl:Artysta
ro:Artist
ru:??????? ????????
sq:Artisti
simple:Artist
sk:Umelec
sr:???????
fi:Taiteilija
sv:Konstnär
th:??????
tg:?????????
uk:??????
ur:?????
vi:Ngh? s?
yo:Oní???nà
diq:Senatkari
bat-smg:Artists
zh:???