title{{redirect3}}
Assistive technology or adaptive technology (AT) is an umbrella term that includes assistive, adaptive, and rehabilitative devices for people with disabilities and also includes the process used in selecting, locating, and using them. AT promotes greater independence by enabling people to perform tasks that they were formerly unable to accomplish, or had great difficulty accomplishing, by providing enhancements to, or changing methods of interacting with, the technology needed to accomplish such tasks.Likewise, disability advocates point out that technology is often created without regard to people with disabilities, creating unnecessary barriers to hundreds of millions of people. Even the makers of AT technologies will often still argue that universal design is preferable to the need for AT and that universal design projects and concepts should be continuously expanded.{{Disability}}
OverviewAssistive Technology is a generic term for devices and modifications that help overcome or remove a disability. The first recorded example of the use of a prosthesis dates to at least 1800 BC.Disability Social History Project and the modern, lightweight, steel, collapsible wheelchair was created by Harry Jennings and his disabled friend Herbert Everest, in 1933.Everest, Herbert A., Jennings, Harry C., "Folding wheel chair", US Patent 2095411, 1937Examples of Assistive technology in architecture include the curb cut is a related structural innovation. Other examples are standing frames, text telephones, accessible keyboards, large print, Braille, & speech recognition computer software. People with disabilities often develop personal or community adaptations, such as strategies to suppress tics in public (for example in Tourette's syndrome), or sign language in deaf communities. Assistive technology or interventions are sometimes controversial or rejected, for example in the controversy over cochlear implants for children.Universally accessible technology yields great rewards to the typical user as well; good accessible design is universal design. One example is the "curb cuts" (or dropped curbs) in the sidewalk at street crossings. While these curb cuts enable pedestrians with mobility impairments to cross the street, they also aid parents with carriages and strollers, shoppers with carts, and travelers and workers with pull-type bags.People with learning disabilities like dyslexia or dysgraphia can find text-to-speech (TTS) software useful for reading and spelling programs useful when writing texts.Computers, with their hardware extensibility, editing, spellchecking and speech synthesis software are becoming the cornerstone of assistive technologies, improving quality of life for those with learning disabilities and visual impairments. Spell assist programs and voice-recognition facilities are also bringing the text reading and writing experience to the wider public.Toys that have been adapted to be used by children with disabilities might have advantages for  non-disabled children as well. The Lekotek movement assists parents by lending assistive technology toys and expertise to families.In the US many health professionals may be certified by RESNA to serve assistive technology needs: occupational therapists, physical therapists, speech language pathologists/audiologists, orthotists and prosthetists, educators, and rehabilitation and health professionals.
Assistive technology products
Personal Emergency Response Systems 
Personal Emergency Response Systems (PERS), or Telecare (UK term), are a particular sort of assistive technology that use electronic sensors connected to an alarm system to help caregivers manage risk and help vulnerable people stay independent at home longer. An example would be the systems being put in place for senior people such as fall detectors, thermometers (for hypothermia risk), flooding and unlit gas sensors (for people with mild dementia). Notably, these alerts can be customized to the particular person's risks. When the alert is triggered, a message is sent to a caregiver or contact center who can respond appropriately.Technology similar to PERS can also be used to act within a person's home rather than just to respond to a detected crisis. Using one of the examples above, gas sensors for people with dementia can be used to trigger a device that turns off the gas and tells someone what has happened.Designing for people with dementia is a good example of how the design of the interface of a piece of AT is critical to its usefulness.  People with dementia or any other identified user group must be involved in the design process to make sure that the design is accessible and usable. In the example above, a voice message could be used to remind the person with dementia to turn off the gas himself, but whose voice should be used, and what should the message say? Questions like these must be answered through user consultation, involvement and evaluation.
Accessible input devices for computers 
Sitting at a desk with a QWERTY keyboard and a mouse remains the dominant way of interacting with a personal computer. Some Assistive Technology reduces the strain of this way of work through ergonomic accessories with height-adjustable furniture, footrests, wrist rests, and arm supports to ensure correct posture. Key guards fit over the keyboard to help prevent unintentional key presses.Alternatively, Assistive Technology may attempt to improve the ergonomics of the devices themselves:

Ergonomic keyboards reduce the discomfort and strain of typing.
Chorded keyboards have a handful of keys (one per digit per hand) to type by &#39;chords&#39; which produce different letters and keys.
Expanded keyboards with larger, more widely spaced keys.
Compact and miniature keyboards.
Dvorak and other alternative layouts may offer more ergonomic layouts of the keys.{{cite journal}}{{cite journal}} There are also variants of Dvorak in which the most common keys are located at either the left or right side of the keyboard.

Input devices may be modified to make them easier to see and understand:

Keyboards with lowercase keys
Keyboards with big keys.
Keyboards with less and big keys, or multifunctional keys, such us the special keyboard PiTech, with only five big rounded keys, which is used with a special software for writingPiTech
Large print keyboard with high contrast colors (such as white on black, black on white, and black on ivory).
Large print adhesive keyboard stickers in high contrast colors (such as white on black, black on white, and black on yellow).
Embossed locator dots help find the &#39;home&#39; keys, F and J, on the keyboard.
Scroll wheels on mice remove the need to locate the scrolling interface on the computer screen.
Footmouse — Foot-operated mouse.

More ambitiously, and quite crucially when keyboard or mouse prove unusable, AT can also replace the keyboard and mouse with alternative devices such as the LOMAK keyboard, trackballs, joysticks, graphics tablets, touchpads, touch screens, foot mice, a microphone with speech recognition software, sip-and-puff input, switch access, and vision-based input devices, such as eye trackers which allow the user to control the mouse with their eyes.
Accessibility software{{Main}}In human-computer interaction, computer accessibility (also known as Accessible computing) refers to the accessibility of a computer system to all people, regardless of disability or severity of impairment. Examples include Web accessibility a set of guidelines http://www.learningdisabilities.org.uk/page.cfm?pagecode=ISSIWD and two accessiblehttp://www.learningdisabilities.org.uk/page.cfm?pagecode=ISSIWDAS web portals designed for people developing reading skills are peepo.com http://www.peepo.com &mdash; try typing a letter with your keyboard for more &mdash; and peepo.co.uk http://www.peepo.co.uk with enhanced graphics, unique style controls and improved interactivity (requires an SVG supported browser).
Durable medical equipment (DME)

Seating products that assist people to sit comfortably and safely (seating systems, cushions, therapeutic seats).
Standing products to support people with disabilities in the standing position while maintaining/improving their health (standing frame, standing wheelchair, active stander).
Walking products to aid people with disabilities who are able to walk or stand with assistance (canes, crutches, walkers, gait trainers).
Advanced technology walking products to aid people with disabilities, such as paraplegia or cerebral palsy, who would not at all able to walk or stand (exoskeletons).
Wheeled mobility products that enable people with reduced mobility to move freely indoors and outdoors (wheelchairs/scooters)
Vehicles modified with Height adjustable suspension, to allow wheelchair entry to the vehicle
Robot-aided rehabilitation is a sensory-motor rehabilitation technique based on the use of robots and mechatronic devices {{Citation needed}}


Mobility impairment

Crutches, including assistive canes
Walkers
Wheelchairs


Assistive technology for visual impairment{{Main}}
Many people with serious visual impairments live independently, using a wide range of tools and techniques.  Examples of assistive technology for visually impairment is include the Canadian currency tactile feature, which a system of raised dots in one corner, based on Braille cells but not standard Braille.Accessibility features - Bank Notes - Bank of Canada For general computer use access technology such as screen readers, screen magnifiers and refreshable Braille displays has been widely taken up.
Hardware

White canes
Large monitors can be used with increased DPI for ease of electronic text reading.
E-book readers, such as the Amazon Kindle and tablet computers, such as the iPad, which offer text-to-speech and adjustable font size features.
Adjustable task lamp, using a fluorescent bulb, shines directly onto the paper and can be adjusted to suit.
Bank note reader
Copyholder holds printed material in near vertical position for easier reading and can be adjusted to suit.
Closed circuit television (CCTV) or video magnifiers. Printed materials and objects are placed under a camera and the magnified image is displayed onto a screen.
Modified cassette recorder. To record a lecture, own thoughts, ideas, notes etc.
Desktop compact cassette dictation system. To allow audio cassette playback with the aid of a foot pedal.
Fusers produce tactile materials, for example diagrams and maps, by applying heat to special swell paper.
Scanner. A device used in conjunction with OCR software. The printed document is scanned and converted into electronic text, which can then be displayed on screen as recognizable text.
Standalone reading aids integrate a scanner, optical character recognition (OCR) software, and speech software in a single machine. These function together without a separate PC.{{Cite web}}
Refreshable Braille display. An electronic tactile device which is placed below the computer keyboard. A line of cells which correspond to Braille text move up and down to represent a line of text on the computer screen.
Electronic Notetaker. A portable computer with a Braille or QWERTY keyboard and synthetic speech. Some models have an integrated Braille display.
Braille embosser. Embosses Braille output from a computer by punching dots onto paper. It connects to a computer in the same way as a text printer.
Perkins Brailler. To manually emboss Grade 1 or 2 Braille.
Mountbatten Brailler. An electric braille writing machine.
Eye Tracking. and Head Tracking Devices


Software

Customization of graphical user interfaces to alter the colors and size of desktops, short-cut icons, menu bars and scroll bars.
Screen magnifiers
Screen readers
Self-voicing applications
Optical character recognition. Converts the printed word into text, via a scanner.
Braille translation. Converts the printed word into Braille, which can then be embossed via a Braille embosser.
Text-to-speech and Speech-to-text
Spell checkers and Grammar checkers
Real-time text for the deaf.


Augmentative and alternative communication (AAC){{Main}}
Augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) is an umbrella term that encompasses methods of communication for those with impairments or restrictions on the production or comprehension of spoken or written language.ASHA (2005). AAC systems are extremely diverse and depend on the capabilities of the user. They may be as basic as pictures on a board that the are used to request food, drink, or other care; or they can be advanced speech generating devices, based on speech synthesis, that are capable of storing hundreds of phrases and words.Gilliam & Marquardt, pp. 356–359.Modern use of AAC began in the 1950s with systems for users who had lost the use of speech following surgical procedures.Glennen & DeCoste. During the 1960s the use of manual sign language grew greatly, but it was not until the 1980s that AAC began to emerge as an area in its own right. AAC is now used for a wide variety of speech impairments. Studies show that AAC use does not impede the development of speech, and may even result in a modest increase in speech production.Schlosser & Wendt.A great diversity of diagnoses, including cerebral palsy, intellectual impairment, autism, and many others, cover varying degrees of communication impairment. AAC interventions are highly individualized, taking into account specific abilities of language comprehension, social-relational characteristics, learning strengths and weaknesses, and developmental patterns for specific types of intellectual disabilities.Beukelman & Mirenda. AAC can be used to aid both spoken and written language, and can supplement or replace speech and writing as necessary. AAC can be a permanent addition to a person's communication or a temporary aid. The systems used in AAC include gestures, hand signals, photographs, pictures, line drawings, words and letters,Mirenda. which can be used alone or in combination to communicate.Beukelman & Mirenda, pp. 246-249.Aided AAC makes great use of symbols, particularly for non-literate users, as well as a large variety of input methods. The specific access method will depend on the skills and abilities of the user. Body parts, pointers, adapted mice, joysticks, or eye trackingMathy could be used, whereas switch access scanning is often used for indirect selection.Jans & Clark. In many cases, rate enhancements methods may be used to speed up the generation of messages. Clearly, an evaluation of a user's abilities and requirements is necessary to match a user with the most appropriate AAC method, input approach, and vocabulary. This evaluation requires the input of family, particularly for early intervention. Respecting ethnicity and family beliefs are key to a family-centered and ethnically competent approach.Perette et al. (2000). Adult AAC users generally have satisfying relationships with family and friends and engage in pleasurable and interesting life activities.
Deafness and hearing loss

Audiometer
Fire alarm paging system
Loop system (portable and fixed)
Radio aids
Telecommunications device for the deaf
Teletext
Video cassette recorders that can read and record subtitles (Closed Captioning).
Vibrating fire alarm placed under pillow when asleep.
Door bell lighting system.


Others

Wakamaru provides companionship, reminds users to take medicine and calls for help if something is wrong.
Telephone Reassurance: community based program that calls seniors at home ensuring their well-being.assistivetech.net: Telephone Reassurance. Accessed 2009-08-06.
Cosmobot is part of a play therapy system designed to motivate children to participate in therapy.
General User Interface for Disorders of Execution (GUIDE) is an interactive verbal prompting system that talks people with cognitive impairment through daily routine tasks.{{cite journal}}

Claims
Since children with autism process visual information easier than auditory information, when utilizing assistive technology claims that any time we use these devices with these children, we're giving them information through their strongest processing area (visual). Therefore various types of technology from "low" tech to "high" tech, should be incorporated into every aspect of daily living in order to improve the functional capabilities of children with autism.Benefits
Regarding comprehension skills, increasing comprehension of tasks/activities/situations is essential in addressing skill areas such as organization, attending, self help, following directions, following rules and modifying behavior. As a result, the child becomes more independent. The following "low" tech visual support strategies can be created and used to benefit and assist the child in increasing his comprehension skills and thus decreasing the occurrence of challenging behaviors.Consistent daily use of an individualized visual schedule will increase a child's organization skills and independent functioning throughout all aspects of his life and will ease transition through adulthood. There are numerous ways to present visual schedules for example an object schedule, 3-ring binder schedule, clipboard schedule, manila file folder schedules, and dry erase board schedules are all beneficial to increase a child's organization skills and independent functioning.The use of a weekly/monthly calendar at both home and school can provide the child with important information regarding up-coming events/activities, rather than relying on auditory information. When the child asks when a particular event will occur, he can easily be referred to the visual calendar. Use of a visual calendar can also be helpful in assisting the child to understand when regularly scheduled events may not occur.Outcomes
In a pilot study, Researchers Lacava, Golan, Baron-Cohen, and Myles explored the use of assistive technology to teach emotion recognition to eight children with Autism and the results indicated that after intervention, participants improved on face and voice emotional recognition for basic and complex emotions that were in the software. As well as for complex voice emotional recognition for emotions not included in Mind Reading.
See also

Braille technology
Cognitive orthotics
Design for All (in ICT)
Matching Person & Technology Model
OATS: Open Source Assistive Technology Software
Occupational Therapy
Web accessibility


Notes

References

{{cite web}}
{{cite book}}  
{{cite book}}
{{cite journal}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite journal}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite journal}}


Further reading

{{cite journal}}
{{cite journal}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}} (Also available as part of the CD-rom, Overcoming Barriers: Theory and Practice in Disability, Cambridge University Press, 1999).
{{cite book}}
Galvão Filho, T. (2009). Tecnologia Assistiva para uma Escola Inclusiva: apropriação, demandas e perspectivas. Tese (Doutorado em Educação) – Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, 2009. (disponível em: &#60;http://www.galvaofilho.net/tese.htm&#62; )
Van der Heijden, D. (2005). How Does Alternative Access to Computers Work?. Jun 26, 2007.
Lahm, E., &#38; Morrissette, S. (1994, April). Zap &#39;em with assistive technology. Paper presented at the annual meeting of The Council for Exceptional Children, Denver, CO.
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite journal}}
{{cite journal}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite book}}
{{cite journal}}
Poulson, David; Martin Ashby; Simon Richardson (eds.) (1996). userfit. A practical handbook on user-centred design for Assistive Technology. TIDE USER consortium.

{{DEFAULTSORT:Assistive Technology}}



ca:Tecnologia de recolzament
de:Hilfsmittel (Rehabilitation)
et:Meditsiiniline abivahend
es:Tecnologías de apoyo
he:????????? ??????
nl:Hulpmiddel voor gehandicapten
ja:????
no:Hjelpemiddel
pl:Technologie asystuj?ce
pt:Tecnologia assistiva
ru:??????????? ???????? ????????????
ur:????? ??????
zh:??