title{{Infobox information appliance}}
The Atari Lynx is a 16-bit handheld game console that was released by Atari Corporation in 1989. The Lynx holds the distinction of being the world's first handheld electronic game with a color LCD. The system is also notable for its forward-looking features, advanced graphics, and ambidextrous layout. The Lynx was released in 1989, the same year as Nintendo's best-selling, monochromatic Game Boy. However, the Lynx failed to achieve the sales numbers required to attract quality third party developers, and was eventually abandoned.Today, as with many older consoles, there is still a small group of devoted fans, creating and selling games for the system.Atari Age Self Published Lynx Games
FeaturesThe Atari Lynx has several innovative features including its being the first color handheld, with a backlit display, a switchable right-handed/left-handed (upside down) configuration, and the ability to network with up to 17 other units via its "ComLynx" system (though most games would network eight or fewer players). ComLynx was originally developed to run over infrared links (and was codenamed RedEye).Atari Explorer Lynx page This was changed to a cable-based networking system before the final release.The Lynx was also the first gaming console with hardware support for zooming/distortion of sprites, allowing fast pseudo-3D games with unrivaled quality at the time and a capacity for drawing filled polygons with limited CPU intervention. Blue Lightning, a game with After Burner-like graphics, was especially notable and featured in TV advertising for the console.The games were originally meant to be loaded from tape, but were later changed to load from ROM. The game data still needed to be copied from ROM to RAM before it could be used, so less memory was available and the games loaded relatively slowly.
HistoryThe Lynx was the second handheld game with the Atari name to actually be produced, the first was Atari Inc.'s handheld electronic game Touch Me. Atari Inc. had previously worked on several other handheld projects including the Breakout, Space Invaders, and the Atari Cosmos portable/tabletop console. However, those projects were shut down during development - some just short of their intended commercial release.The Lynx system was originally developed by Epyx as the Handy Game. Planning and design of the console began in 1986 and completed in 1987. Epyx first showed the Handy system at the Winter Consumer Electronics Show (CES) in January 1989. Facing financial difficulties, Epyx sought out partners. Atari Corp. and Epyx eventually agreed that Atari Corp. would handle production and marketing, while Epyx would handle software development.Atari Corp. changed the internal speaker and removed the thumb-stick on the control pad before releasing it as the Lynx, initially retailing in the US at US$179.95. Atari Corp. then showed the Lynx to the press at the Summer 1989 CES as the "Portable Color Entertainment System", which was changed to Lynx when actual consoles were distributed to resellers.However, Nintendo's new Game Boy was also introduced at the 1989 CES. At $90, it was much less expensive than the Lynx, without the color or custom chips. Nintendo had no problems supplying retailers with the Game Boy for the Christmas season while Atari Corp. only managed limited distribution of their Lynx by year's end.
During 1990, the Lynx had moderate sales but Nintendo's Game Boy continued to gain market share. In 1991, Atari Corp. relaunched the Lynx with a new marketing campaign, new packaging, slightly improved hardware, and a new sleek look. The new system (referred to within Atari Corp. as the "Lynx II") featured rubber hand grips and a clearer backlit color screen with a power save option (which turned off the LCD panel's backlighting). It also replaced the monaural headphone jack of the original Lynx with one wired for stereo. The new packaging made the Lynx available without any accessories, dropping the price to $99. Although sales improved, Nintendo still dominated the handheld market.As with the actual console units, the game cartridges themselves evolved over the first year of the console's release. The first generation of cartridges were flat, and were designed to be stackable for ease of storage. However, this design proved to be very difficult to remove from the console and was replaced by a second design. This style, called "tabbed" or "ridged", used the same basic design as the original cartridges with the addition of two small tabs on the cartridge's underside to aid in removal. The original flat style cartridges could be stacked on top of the newer cartridges, but the newer cartridges could not be easily stacked on each other, nor were they stored easily. Thus a third style, the "curved lip" style was produced, and all official and third-party cartridges during the console's lifespan were released (or re-released) using this style.Atari Lynx cartridge style illustrations at AtariAge.com.In May 1991, Sega launched its Game Gear portable gaming handheld. Also a color handheld, in comparison to the Lynx it had a higher cost, slightly smaller bulk, and similar battery life. However, the Game Gear was backed up by significantly more popular titles and consequently the market became dominated by Nintendo followed by Sega in a distant second and the Lynx in third.In 1994, Atari Corp. shifted its focus away from the Lynx. As Nintendo's Super Nintendo and Sega's Mega Drive/Genesis filled retailers' shelves, Atari Corp. refocused its efforts on its Jaguar console. A handful of games were released during this time, including Battlezone 2000. In 1996, Atari shut down its internal game development.Telegames released a number of games in the second half of the 1990s, including a port of Raiden and a platformer called Fat Bobby in 1997, as well as an action sports game called Hyperdrome in 1999. At the end of the 1990s, Hasbro, the owners of the Atari properties at the time, released the rights to develop for the system to the public domain. Since then a number of independent developers released games into the new decade, like Championship Rally, CyberVirus, and Alpine Games.Alpine Games by Duranik Some of the late 90s/early 2000s games were under development by other companies at one time, but rights to the game programs and all of the existing code was bought and finished by other developers.Songbird Productions' development page for CyberVirusIn 2008 Atari was honored at the 59th Annual Technology & Engineering Emmy Awards for pioneering the development of handheld games with its Lynx game unit.http://www.gamespot.com/news/6184421.htmlOn October 24, 2009, North American company Super Fighter Team released Zaku, an all new, all original horizontal shooter for the Lynx developed by PenguiNet. Of significant note is that it was the first new game for the system whose game card has an authentic "curved lip" plastic shell. The game also shipped with a full color cardstock box, and 31 page instruction manual printed in both English and French.Official Zaku website
ReceptionAlthough it was innovative and unique for its time, gamers found the Atari Lynx to be quite large and bulky, even the 2nd version of the unit.However, the game system was reviewed in 1990 in Dragon #155 by Hartley, Patricia, and Kirk Lesser in "The Role of Computers" column. The reviewers gave the Lynx 5 out of 5 stars.{{cite journal}}
Technical specifications

MOS 65SC02 processor running at up to 4 MHz (~3.6 MHz average)
8-bit CPU, 16-bit address space
Sound engine
4 channel sound (Lynx II with panning)
8-bit DAC for each channel (4 channels × 8-bits/channel = 32 bits commonly quoted)
Video DMA driver for liquid-crystal display
4,096 color (12-bit) palette
16 simultaneous colors (4 bits) from palette per scanline (more than 16 colors can be displayed by changing palettes after each scanline)
8 System timers (2 reserved for LCD timing, one for UART)
Interrupt controller
UART (for ComLynx) (fixed format 8E1, up to 62500 Bd)
512 bytes of bootstrap and game-card loading ROM
Suzy (16-bit custom CMOS chip running at {{nowrap}})
Graphics engine
Hardware drawing support
Unlimited number of high-speed sprites with collision detection
Hardware high-speed sprite scaling, distortion, and tilting effects
Hardware decoding of compressed sprite data
Hardware clipping and multi-directional scrolling
Variable frame rate (up to 75 frames/second)
160 × 102 standard resolution (16,320 addressable pixels)
Math co-processor
Hardware 16-bit × 16-bit ? 32-bit multiply with optional accumulation; 32-bit ÷ 16-bit ? 16-bit divide
Parallel processing of CPU and a single multiply or a divide instruction
RAM: 64 KB 120ns DRAM
Storage: Cartridge - 128, 256 and 512 KB exist, up to 2 MB is possible with bank-switching logic.
Some (homebrew) carts with EEPROM to save hi-scores.

Ports:
Headphone port ({{nowrap}} stereo; wired for mono on the original Lynx)
ComLynx (multiple unit communications, serial)
LCD Screen: 3.5&#34; diagonal
Battery holder (six AA) ~4–5 hours (Lynx I) ~5-6 hours (Lynx II)


See also

List of Atari Lynx games
History of Atari


References{{reflist}}
External links{{commonscat}}

{{dmoz}}
AtariAge &ndash; Comprehensive Lynx Database and information
Review of the Atari Lynx 2 on YouTube

{{Atari hardware}}
{{dedicated video game handheld consoles}}


cs:Atari Lynx
de:Atari Lynx
es:Atari Lynx
eo:Atari Lynx
fr:Lynx (console)
hr:Atari Lynx
ko:??? ???
it:Atari Lynx
nl:Atari Lynx
ja:Atari Lynx
pl:Atari Lynx
pt:Atari Lynx
ru:Atari Lynx
fi:Atari Lynx
sv:Atari Lynx
zh:Atari Lynx