title{{Other uses}}
{{pp-move-indef}}

Atlantis (in Greek, {{polytonic}}, "island of Atlas") is a legendary island first mentioned in Plato's dialogues Timaeus and Critias, written about 360 BC.  According to Plato, Atlantis was a naval power lying "in front of the Pillars of Hercules" that conquered many parts of Western Europe and Africa 9,000 years before the time of Solon, or approximately 9600 BC. After a failed attempt to invade Athens, Atlantis sank into the ocean "in a single day and night of misfortune".Scholars dispute whether and how much Plato's story or account was inspired by older traditions.  In Critias, Plato claims that his accounts of ancient Athens and Atlantis stem from a visit to Egypt by the legendary Athenian lawgiver Solon in the 6th century BC.  In Egypt, Solon met a priest of Sais, who translated the history of ancient Athens and Atlantis, recorded on papyri in Egyptian hieroglyphs, into Greek.  Some scholars argue Plato drew upon memories of past events such as the Thera eruption or the Trojan War, while others insist that he took inspiration from contemporary events like the destruction of Helike in 373 BCPlato's Timaeus is usually dated 360 BC; it was followed by his Critias. or the failed Athenian invasion of Sicily in 415–413 BC.The possible existence of a genuine Atlantis was discussed throughout classical antiquity, but it was usually rejected and occasionally parodied by later authors. Alan Cameron states: "It is only in modern times that people have taken the Atlantis story seriously; no one did so in antiquity".Alan Cameron, Greek Mythography in the Roman World, Oxford University Press (2004) p. 124 The Timaeus remained known in a Latin rendition by Calcidius through the Middle Ages, and the allegorical aspect of Atlantis was taken up by Humanists in utopian works of several Renaissance writers, like Francis Bacon's "New Atlantis". Atlantis inspires today's literature, from science fiction to comic books to films. Its name has become a byword for any and all supposed advanced prehistoric lost civilizations.
Plato's account
Plato's dialogues Timaeus and Critias, written in 360 BC, contain the earliest references to Atlantis. For unknown reasons, Plato never completed Critias. Plato introduced Atlantis in Timaeus:{{quote}}The four persons appearing in those two dialogues are the politicians Critias and Hermocrates as well as the philosophers Socrates and Timaeus of Locri, although only Critias speaks of Atlantis. In his works Plato makes extensive use of the Socratic dialogues in order to discuss contrary positions within the context of a supposition.The Timaeus begins with an introduction, followed by an account of the creations and structure of the universe and ancient civilizations. In the introduction, Socrates muses about the perfect society, described in Plato's Republic (c. 380 BC), and wonders if he and his guests might recollect a story which exemplifies such a society. Critias mentions an allegedly historical tale that would make the perfect example, and follows by describing Atlantis as is recorded in the Critias. In his account, ancient Athens seems to represent the "perfect society" and Atlantis its opponent, representing the very antithesis of the "perfect" traits described in the Republic. According to Critias, the Hellenic gods of old divided the land so that each god might own a lot; Poseidon was appropriately, and to his liking, bequeathed the island of Atlantis. The island was larger than Ancient Libya and Asia Minor combined,{{cite web}}Also it has been interpreted that Plato or someone before him in the chain of the oral or written tradition of the report accidentally changed the very similar Greek words for "bigger than" ("meson") and "between" ("mezon") - {{cite book}} but it afterwards was sunk by an earthquake and became an impassable mud shoal, inhibiting travel to any part of the ocean. The Egyptians, Plato asserted, described Atlantis as an island comprising mostly mountains in the northern portions and along the shore, and encompassing a great plain of an oblong shape in the south "extending in one direction three thousand stadia [about 555&nbsp;km; 345&nbsp;mi], but across the center inland it was two thousand stadia [about 370&nbsp;km; 230&nbsp;mi]." Fifty stadia [9&nbsp;km; 6&nbsp;mi] from the coast was a mountain that was low on all sides...broke it off all round aboutCritias 113, Bury translation.... the central island itself was five stades in diameter [about 0.92&nbsp;km; 0.57&nbsp;mi].Critias 116a, Bury translation.In Plato's myth, Poseidon fell in love with Cleito, the daughter of Evenor and Leucippe, who bore him five pairs of male twins. The eldest of these, Atlas, was made rightful king of the entire island and the ocean (called the Atlantic Ocean in his honor), and was given the mountain of his birth and the surrounding area as his fiefdom. Atlas's twin Gadeirus, or Eumelus in Greek, was given the extremity of the island towards the pillars of Hercules.The name is a back-formation from Gades, the Greek name for Cadiz. The other four pairs of twins—Ampheres and Evaemon, Mneseus and Autochthon, Elasippus and Mestor, and Azaes and Diaprepes—were also given "rule over many men, and a large territory."Poseidon carved the mountain where his love dwelt into a palace and enclosed it with three circular moats of increasing width, varying from one to three stadia and separated by rings of land proportional in size. The Atlanteans then built bridges northward from the mountain, making a route to the rest of the island. They dug a great canal to the sea, and alongside the bridges carved tunnels into the rings of rock so that ships could pass into the city around the mountain; they carved docks from the rock walls of the moats. Every passage to the city was guarded by gates and towers, and a wall surrounded each of the city's rings. The walls were constructed of red, white and black rock quarried from the moats, and were covered with brass, tin and the precious metal orichalcum, respectively.Critias 116bcAccording to Critias, 9,000 years before his lifetime a war took place between those outside the Pillars of Hercules at the Strait of Gibraltar and those who dwelt within them. The Atlanteans had conquered the parts of Libya within the Pillars of Hercules as far as Egypt and the European continent as far as Tyrrhenia, and subjected its people to slavery. The Athenians led an alliance of resistors against the Atlantean empire, and as the alliance disintegrated, prevailed alone against the empire, liberating the occupied lands.{{quote}}The logographer Hellanicus of Lesbos wrote an earlier work titled Atlantis, of which only a few fragments survive. Hellanicus' work appears to have been a genealogical one concerning the daughters of Atlas{{cite book}} (???????? in Greek means "of Atlas"), but some authors have suggested a possible connection with Plato's island. John V. Luce notes that when he writes about the genealogy of Atlantis's kings, Plato writes in the same style as Hellanicus and suggests a similarity between a fragment of Hellanicus's work and an account in the Critias. Robert Castleden suggests Plato may have borrowed his title from Hellanicus, and that Hellanicus may have based his work on an earlier work on Atlantis.Castleden 2001 p. 164
Reception
Ancient
Some ancient writers viewed Atlantis as fiction while others believed it was real.Nesselrath (2005), pp. 161–171. The philosopher Crantor, a student of Plato's student Xenocrates, is often cited as an example of a writer who thought the story to be historical fact. His work, a commentary on Plato's Timaeus, is lost, but Proclus, a Neoplatonist of the fifth century AD, reports on it.Timaeus 24a: {{Polytonic}}. The passage in question has been represented in the modern literature either as claiming that Crantor actually visited Egypt, had conversations with priests, and saw hieroglyphs confirming the story or as claiming that he learned about them from other visitors to Egypt.Cameron 2002 Proclus wrote{{quote}}The next sentence is often translated "Crantor adds, that this is testified by the prophets of the Egyptians, who assert that these particulars [which are narrated by Plato] are written on pillars which are still preserved." But in the original, the sentence starts not with the name Crantor but with the ambiguous He, and whether this referred to Crantor or to Plato is the subject of considerable debate. Proponents of both Atlantis as a myth and Atlantis as history have argued that the word refers to Crantor.Castleden 2001, p,168 Alan Cameron, however, argues that it should be interpreted as referring to Plato, and that when Proclus writes that "we must bear in mind concerning this whole feat of the Athenians, that it is neither a mere myth nor unadorned history, although some take it as history and others as myth", he is treating "Crantor's view as mere personal opinion, nothing more; in fact he first quotes and then dismisses it as representing one of the two unacceptable extremes".Cameron 1983 Cameron also points out that whether he refers to Plato or to Crantor, the statement does not support conclusions such as Otto Muck's "Crantor came to Sais and saw there in the temple of Neith the column, completely covered with hieroglyphs, on which the history of Atlantis was recorded. Scholars translated it for him, and he testified that their account fully agreed with Plato's account of Atlantis" or J. V. Luce's suggestion that Crantor sent "a special enquiry to Egypt" and that he may simply be referring to Plato's own claims.Another passage from Proclus' commentary on the Timaeus gives a description of the geography of Atlantis: That an island of such nature and size once existed is evident from what is said by certain authors who investigated the things around the outer sea. For according to them, there were seven islands in that sea in their time, sacred to Persephone, and also three others of enormous size, one of which was sacred to Hades, another to Ammon, and another one between them to Poseidon, the extent of which was a thousand stadia [200&nbsp;km]; and the inhabitants of it—they add—preserved the remembrance from their ancestors of the immeasurably large island of Atlantis which had really existed there and which for many ages had reigned over all islands in the Atlantic sea and which itself had like-wise been sacred to Poseidon. Now these things Marcellus has written in his Aethiopica".Proclus, Commentary on Plato's Timaeus, p. 117.10–30 (=FGrHist 671 F 1), trans. Taylor, Nesselrath. Marcellus remains unidentified.
Other ancient historians and philosophers believing in the existence of Atlantis were Strabo and Posidonius.Strabo 2.3.6Plato's account of Atlantis may have also inspired parodic imitation: writing only a few decades after the Timaeus and Critias, the historian Theopompus of Chios wrote of a land beyond the ocean known as Meropis. This description was included in Book 8 of his voluminous Philippica, which contains a dialogue between King Midas and Silenus, a companion of Dionysus. Silenus describes the Meropids, a race of men who grow to twice normal size, and inhabit two cities on the island of Meropis (Cos?): Eusebes ({{Polytonic}}, "Pious-town") and Machimos ({{Polytonic}}, "Fighting-town"). He also reports that an army of ten million soldiers crossed the ocean to conquer Hyperborea, but abandoned this proposal when they realized that the Hyperboreans were the luckiest people on earth. Heinz-Günther Nesselrath has argued that these and other details of Silenus' story are meant as imitation and exaggeration of the Atlantis story, for the purpose of exposing Plato's ideas to ridicule.Nesselrath 1998, pp. 1–8.Zoticus, a Neoplatonist philosopher of the 3rd century AD, wrote an epic poem based on Plato's account of Atlantis.Porphyry, Life of Plotinus, 7=35. The 4th century historian Ammianus Marcellinus, relying on a lost work by Timagenes, a historian writing in the 1st century BC, writes that the Druids of Gaul said that part of the inhabitants of Gaul had migrated there from distant islands. Some have understood Ammianus's testimony as a claim that at the time of Atlantis's actual sinking into the sea, its inhabitants fled to western Europe; but Ammianus in fact says that “the Drasidae (Druids) recall that a part of the population is indigenous but others also migrated in from islands and lands beyond the Rhine" (Res Gestae 15.9), an indication that the immigrants came to Gaul from the north (Britain, the Netherlands or Germany), not from a theorized location in the Atlantic Ocean to the south-west.Fitzpatrick-Matthews, Keith. Lost Continents: Atlantis. Instead, the Celts that dwelled along the ocean were reported to venerate twin gods (Dioscori) that appeared to them coming from that ocean.http://www.theoi.com/Text/DiodorusSiculus4A.html Bibliotheca historica - Diodorus Siculus 4.56.4: "And the writers even offer proofs of these things, pointing out that the Celts who dwell along the ocean venerate the Dioscori above any of the gods, since they have a tradition handed down from ancient times that these gods appeared among them coming from the ocean. Moreover, the country which skirts the ocean bears, they say, not a few names which are derived from the Argonauts and the Dioscori."
Jewish and Christian
The Hellenistic Jewish philosopher Philo in the early 1st century AD wrote about the destruction of Atlantis in his On the Eternity of the World, xxvi. 141:{{quote}}Some scholars believe Clement of Rome cryptically referenced Atlantis in his First Epistle of Clement, 20: 8:{{quote}}On this passage the theologian Joseph Barber Lightfoot (Apostolic Fathers, 1885, II, p.&nbsp;84) noted: "Clement may possibly be referring to some known, but hardly accessible land, lying without the pillars of Hercules. But more probably he contemplated some unknown land in the far west beyond the ocean, like the fabled Atlantis of Plato..."Lightfoot, translator, The Apostolic Fathers, II, 1885, P. 84, Edited & Revised by Michael W. Holmes, 1989.Other early Christian writers wrote about Atlantis, though they had mixed views on whether it once existed or was an untrustworthy myth of pagan origin.L. Sprague de Camp, Lost Continents, 1954, p. 307 Tertullian believed Atlantis was once real and wrote that in the Atlantic Ocean once existed "(the isle) that was equal in size to Libya or Asia"http://www.newadvent.org/fathers/0401.htm referring to Plato's geographical description of Atlantis. The early Christian apologist writer Arnobius also believed Atlantis once existed but blamed its destruction on pagans.http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/anf06.xii.iii.i.v.htmlCosmas Indicopleustes in the 6th century AD wrote of Atlantis in his Christian Topography in attempt to prove his theory the world was flat and surrounded by water:{{quote}}A Hebrew treatise on computational astronomy dated to AD 1378/79, alludes to the Atlantis myth in a discussion concerning the determination of zero points for the calculation of longitude:{{quote}}
ModernFrancis Bacon's 1627 essay The New Atlantis describes a utopian society that he called Bensalem, located off the western coast of America. A character in the narrative gives a history of Atlantis that is similar to Plato's and places Atlantis in America. It is not clear whether Bacon means North or South America. The Swedish scholar Olaus Rudbeck published Atland in several volumes, starting in 1679. This attempted to prove that Sweden was Atlantis, the cradle of civilization, and Swedish the original language of Adam from which Latin and Hebrew had evolved.Auroux, Sylvain, ed. (2006). History of the Language Sciences: An International Handbook on the Evolution of Language Sciences. Walter de Gruyter, ISBN 3110167352, pp. 1125-1126. The Latin parallel title is Atlantica and the subtitle of both is Manheim, that is, home of mankind.  According to Rudbeck, Atland means fatherland, and it was the original name of Atlantis.  Isaac Newton's 1728 The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended studies a variety of mythological links to Atlantis.Isaac Newton (1728). The Chronology of Ancient Kingdoms Amended In the middle and late 19th century, several renowned Mesoamerican scholars, starting with Charles Etienne Brasseur de Bourbourg, and including Edward Herbert Thompson and Augustus Le Plongeon proposed that Atlantis was somehow related to Mayan and Aztec culture. The 1882 publication of Atlantis: the Antediluvian World by Ignatius L. Donnelly stimulated much popular interest in Atlantis. Donnelly attempted to establish that all known ancient civilizations were descended from Atlantis, which he saw as a technologically sophisticated culture, saying that Atlanteans invented gunpowder and the compass thousands of years before the rest of the world invented written language.During the late 19th century, ideas about the legendary nature of Atlantis were combined with stories of other lost continents such as Mu and Lemuria.  The esoteric text Oera Linda, published in 1872, mentions it under the name Atland (the name used by Olaus Rudbeck). The book claims that it was submerged in 2193 BC, the same year that 19th century almanacs, following traditional Biblical chronology, gave for Noah's flood.{{Cite journal}} Helena Blavatsky wrote in The Secret Doctrine (1888) that the Atlanteans were cultural heroes (contrary to Plato who describes them mainly as a military threat), and are the fourth "Root Race", succeeded by the "Aryan race". Furthermore, she expressed the belief that it was Homer before Plato who first wrote of Atlantis."It was not he [Plato] who invented it, since Homer, who preceded him by many centuries, also speaks of the Atlantes and of their island in his Odyssey. Secret Doctrine, vol 2. pt3, ch6. Theosophists believe the civilization of Atlantis reached its peak between 1,000,000 and 900,000 years ago but destroyed itself through internal warfare brought about by the inhabitants' dangerous use of magical powers. William Scott-Elliot in The Story of Atlantis (1896) elaborated on Blavatsky's account, claiming that Atlantis eventually split into two linked islands, one called Daitya, and the other Ruta, which was later reduced to a final remnant called Poseidonis.William Scott Elliot, The Story of Atlantis, Theosophical Publishing Society, 1896, p.18 Scott-Elliot's information came from the clairvoyant Charles Webster Leadbeater. Rudolf Steiner wrote of the cultural evolution of AtlantisSteiner, Rudolf (1922), An Outline of Occult Science in much the same vein. Edgar Cayce first mentioned Atlantis in 1923,Robinson, Lytle, 1972, Edgar Cayce’s Story of the Origin and Destiny of Man, Berkeley Books, New York, pg 51. and later suggested that it was originally a continent-sized region extending from the Azores to the Bahamas, holding an ancient, highly evolved civilization which had ships and aircraft powered by a mysterious form of energy crystal. He also predicted that parts of Atlantis would rise in 1968 or 1969. The Bimini Road, a submerged rock formation of large rectangular stones just off North Bimini Island in the Bahamas, was claimed by Robert Ferro and Michael GrumleyFerro and Grumley, Atlantis: the Autobiography of a Search (New York: Doubleday) 1970. to be evidence of the lost civilization.
Edgar Cayce and others have often described Atlantis using techniques associated with Psychic archaeology.According to Herodotus (c. 430 BC), a Phoenician expedition had circumnavigated Africa at the behest of Pharaoh Necho, sailing south down the Red Sea and Indian Ocean and northwards in the Atlantic, re-entering the Mediterranean Sea through the Pillars of Hercules. His description of northwest Africa makes it very clear that he located the Pillars of Hercules precisely where they are located today. Nevertheless, a supposed belief that they had been placed at the Strait of Sicily prior to Eratosthenes has been cited in some Atlantis theories.
Nazism and occultismThe concept of Atlantis attracted Nazi theorists (see Nazism and occultism). In 1938, Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler organized a German expedition to Tibet in 1939 to search for Aryan Atlanteans,Christopher Hale, Himmler's Crusade (Hoboken: Wiley, 2003), p. 26. although this suggestion has been criticised as inaccurateFortean Times, October 2003, Christopher Hale, Page 31 and that the expedition was looking for the origins of the 'Europoid' race or that it was a more general biological expedition.Fortean Times, October 2003, Christopher Hale, Page 38 According to Julius Evola, writing in 1934,Evola, Revolt Against the Modern World, 1934. the Atlanteans were Hyperboreans—Nordic supermen who originated on the North pole (see Thule). Similarly, Alfred Rosenberg (The Myth of the Twentieth Century, 1930) spoke of a "Nordic-Atlantean" or "Aryan-Nordic" master race.
Recent timesAs continental drift became more widely accepted during the 1960s, and the increased understanding of plate tectonics demonstrated the impossibility of a lost continent in the geologically recent past,{{cite book}} most “Lost Continent” theories of Atlantis began to wane in popularity.Plato scholar Dr. Julia Annas, Regents Professor of Philosophy at the University of Arizona, had this to say on the matter:{{quote}}Kenneth Feder points out that Critias's story in the Timaeus provides a major clue. In the dialogue, Critias says, referring to Socrates' hypothetical society:{{quote}}Feder quotes A. E. Taylor, who wrote, "We could not be told much more plainly that the whole narrative of Solon's conversation with the priests and his intention of writing the poem about Atlantis are an invention of Plato's fancy."Feder, Kenneth L., Frauds, Myths and Mysteries: Science and Pseudoscience in Archaeology, Mayfield Publishing, 1999, p. 164.
Location hypotheses
{{Main}}
Since Donnelly's day, there have been dozens of locations proposed for Atlantis, to the point where the name has become a generic concept, divorced from the specifics of Plato's account. This is reflected in the fact that many proposed sites are not within the Atlantic at all. Few today are scholarly or archaeological hypotheses, while others have been made by psychic or other pseudoscientific means. Many of the proposed sites share some of the characteristics of the Atlantis story (water, catastrophic end, relevant time period), but none has been demonstrated to be a true historical Atlantis.
In or near the Mediterranean SeaMost of the historically proposed locations are in or near the Mediterranean Sea: islands such as Sardinia, Crete and Santorini, Sicily, Cyprus, and Malta; land-based cities or states such as Troy,Zangger, Eberhard, The Flood from Heaven: Deciphering the Atlantis legend, New York: William Morrow and Company, 1993 Tartessos, and Tantalus (in the province of Manisa), Turkey; Israel-Sinai or Canaan;{{Citation needed}} and northwestern Africa.{{cite web}}http://www.atlantis-bakhu.com/ Atlantis-Bakhu The Thera eruption, dated to the 17th or 16th century BC, caused a large tsunami that experts hypothesize devastated the Minoan civilization on the nearby island of Crete, further leading some to believe that this may have been the catastrophe that inspired the story.The wave that destroyed Atlantis Harvey Lilley, BBC News Online, 2007-04-20. Retrieved 2007-04-21. A. G. Galanopoulos argued that Plato's dating of 9,000 years before Solon's time was the result of an error in translation, probably from Egyptian into Greek, which produced "thousands" instead of "hundreds". Such an error would also rescale Plato's Atlantis to the size of Crete, while leaving the city the size of the crater on Thera; 900 years before Solon would be the 15th century BC.Galanopoulos, Angelos Ge?rgiou, and Edward Bacon, Atlantis: The Truth Behind the Legend, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1969 In the area of the Black Sea the following locations have been proposed: Bosporus and AncomahAtlantis and Lost city of AncomahAncomah myth in Turkish Folklore (a legendary place near Trabzon).
In the Atlantic Ocean and EuropeIn 2011, a team, working on a documentary for the Discovery Channel,{{cite web}} led by Professor Richard Freund, from the University of Hartford, claimed to have found evidence of the city in the Doñana National Park mud flats in South Western Andalusia, in Spain.{{cite news}} The team identified its possible location within the marshlands of the Doñana National Park, in the area that once was the Lacus Ligustinus,{{cite book}} between Huelva, Cádiz and Seville provinces, and speculated that Atlantis had been destroyed by a tsunami,{{cite news}} by extrapolating results from a previous study by Spanish researchers, published four years earlier.{{cite journal}}  Spanish scientists have dismissed Freund's claims claiming that he was sensationalising their work. The anthropologist Juan Villarías-Robles, who works with the Spanish National Research Council, said "Richard Freund was a newcomer to our project and appeared to be  involved in his own very controversial issue concerning King Solomon's search for ivory and gold in Tartessos, the well documented settlement in  the Donaña area established in the first millennium BC" and described his claims as 'fanciful'.{{cite news}} A similar theory had previously been put forward by a German researcher, Rainer W. Kühne, but based only on satellite imagery and placing Atlantis in the Marismas de Hinojos, North of the city of Cádiz.{{cite journal}} Before that, Historian Adolf Schulten had stated in the 1920s that Plato had used Tartessos as the basis for his Atlantis myth.{{cite journal}} The location of Atlantis in the Atlantic Ocean has certain appeal given the closely related names. Popular culture often places Atlantis there, perpetuating the original Platonic setting. Several hypotheses place the sunken island in northern Europe, including Doggerland in the North Sea, and Sweden (by Olof Rudbeck in Atland, 1672–1702). Some have proposed the Celtic Shelf as a possible locations, and that there is a link to Ireland.{{cite web}} The Canary Islands and Madeira Islands have also been identified as a possible location,{{cite book}}{{cite book}}{{cite book}}{{cite book}}  west of the Straits of Gibraltar but in relative proximity to the Mediterranean Sea. Various islands or island groups in the Atlantic were also identified as possible locations, notably the Azores.{{cite book}} However detailed geological studies of the Canary Islands, the Azores, Madeira, and the ocean bottom surrounding them found a complete lack of any evidence for the catastrophic subsidence of these islands at any time during their existence and a complete lack of any evidence that the ocean bottom surrounding them was ever dry land at any time in the recent past. The submerged island of Spartel near the Strait of Gibraltar has also been suggested.
Other locations
Several writers have speculated that Antarctica is the site of Atlantis,{{cite book}}{{cite book}} while others have proposed Caribbean locations such as Batabano Bay{{cite web}} south of Cuba, the Bahamas, and the Bermuda Triangle.Hanson, Bill. The Atlantis Triangle. 2003. Areas in the Pacific and Indian Oceans have also been proposed including Indonesia (i.e. Sundaland).Atlantis - The Lost Continent Finally Found Santos, Arysio; Atlantis Publications, August 2005, ISBN 0-9769550-0-8. The stories of a lost continent off India, named "Kumari Kandam," have inspired some to draw parallels to Atlantis.{{Cite book}}
See also

Atlantis in popular culture


References

Notes
{{Reflist}}

Further reading



Ancient sources
{{Refbegin}}

Plato, Timaeus, translated by Benjamin Jowett at Project Gutenberg; alternative version with commentary.
Plato, Critias, translated by Benjamin Jowett at Project Gutenberg; alternative version with commentary.
{{refend}}

Modern sources
{{refbegin}}

Bichler, R (1986). &#39;Athen besiegt Atlantis. Eine Studie über den Ursprung der Staatsutopie&#39;, Canopus, vol. 20, no. 51, pp. 71–88.
Cameron, Alan (1983). &#39;Crantor and Posidonius on Atlantis&#39;, The Classical Quarterly, New Series, Vol. 33, No. 1 (1983), pp. 81–91
Cayce, Edgar Evans (1968). Edgar Cayce's Atlantis. ISBN 9780876045121
Christopher, Kevin Atlantis: No way, No how, No where
Crowley, Aleister - Lost Continent
De Camp, LS (1954). Lost Continents: The Atlantis Theme in History, Science, and Literature, New York: Gnome Press.
Castleden, Rodney (2001) Atlantis Destroyed', London:Routledge.
Collina-Girard, Jacques, L'Atlantide retrouvée: enquête scientifique autour d'un mythe (Paris: Belin - pour la science, 2009).
Donnelly, I (1882). Atlantis: The Antediluvian World, New York: Harper &#38; Bros. Retrieved November 6, 2001, from Project Gutenberg.
Ellis, R (1998). Imaging Atlantis, New York: Knopf. ISBN 0-679-44602-8
Erlingsson, U (2004). Atlantis from a Geographer's Perspective: Mapping the Fairy Land, Miami: Lindorm. ISBN 0-9755946-0-5
Flem-Ath R, Wilson C (2001). The Atlantis Blueprint: Unlocking the Ancient Mysteries of a Long-Lost Civilization, Delacorte Press
Frau, S (2002). Le Colonne d'Ercole: Un'inchiesta, Rome: Nur neon. ISBN 88-900740-0-0
Gill, C (1976). &#39;The origin of the Atlantis myth&#39;, Trivium, vol. 11, pp. 8–9.
Gordon, J.S. (2008). &#39;The Rise and Fall of Atlantis: and the mysterious origins of human civilization&#39;, Watkins Publishing, London. ISBN 978-1-905857-24-1
Görgemanns, H (2000). &#39;Wahrheit und Fiktion in Platons Atlantis-Erzählung&#39;, Hermes, vol. 128, pp. 405–420.
Griffiths, JP (1985). &#39;Atlantis and Egypt&#39;, Historia, vol. 34, pp. 35f.
Heidel, WA (1933). &#39;A suggestion concerning Platon&#39;s Atlantis&#39;, Daedalus, vol. 68, pp. 189–228.
Jakovljevic, Ranko (2005) Gvozdena vrata Atlantide, IK Beoknjiga Belgrade. ISBN 86-7694-042-8
Jakovljevic, Ranko (2008) Atlantida u Srbiji IK Pesic i sinovi Belgrade. ISBN 978-86-7540-091-2
Jordan, P (1994). The Atlantis Syndrome, Stroud: Sutton Publishing. ISBN 0-7509-3518-9
King, D. (1970). Finding Atlantis: A true story of genius, madness, and an extraordinary quest for a lost world. Harmony Books, New York. ISBN 1-4000-4752-8
Luce, J V (1982). End of Atlantis: New Light on an Old Legend, Efstathiadis Group: Greece
Martin, TH [1841] (1981). &#39;Dissertation sur l&#39;Atlantide&#39;, in TH Martin, Études sur le Timée de Platon, Paris: Librairie philosophique J. Vrin, pp. 257–332.
Morgan, KA (1998). &#39;Designer history: Plato&#39;s Atlantis story and fourth-century ideology&#39;, Journal of Hellenic Studies, vol. 118, pp. 101–118.
Muck, Otto Heinrich, The Secret of Atlantis, Translation by Fred Bradley of Alles über Atlantis (Econ Verlag GmbH, Düsseldorf-Wien, 1976), Times Books, a division of Quadrangle/The New York Times Book Co., Inc., Three Park Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10016, 1978
Nesselrath, HG (1998). &#39;Theopomps Meropis und Platon: Nachahmung und Parodie&#39;, Göttinger Forum für Altertumswissenschaft, vol. 1, pp. 1–8.
Nesselrath, HG (2001a). &#39;Atlantes und Atlantioi: Von Platon zu Dionysios Skytobrachion&#39;, Philologus, vol. 145, pp. 34–38.
Nesselrath, HG (2001b). &#39;Atlantis auf ägyptischen Stelen? Der Philosoph Krantor als Epigraphiker&#39;, Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik, vol. 135, pp. 33–35.
Nesselrath, HG (2002). Platon und die Erfindung von Atlantis, München/Leipzig: KG Saur Verlag. ISBN 3-598-77560-1
Nesselrath, HG (2005). &#39;Where the Lord of the Sea Grants Passage to Sailors through the Deep-blue Mere no More: The Greeks and the Western Seas&#39;, Greece & Rome, vol. 52, pp. 153–171.
Phillips, ED (1968). &#39;Historical Elements in the Myth of Atlantis&#39;, Euphrosyne, vol. 2, pp. 3–38
Ramage, ES (1978). Atlantis: Fact or Fiction?, Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-10482-3
Settegast, M. (1987). Plato Prehistorian: 10,000 to 5000 B.C. in Myth and Archaeology, Cambridge, MA, Rotenberg Press.
Spence, L [1926] (2003). The History of Atlantis, Mineola, NY: Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-42710-2
{{Cite book}}.
Szlezák, TA (1993). &#39;Atlantis und Troia, Platon und Homer: Bemerkungen zum Wahrheitsanspruch des Atlantis-Mythos&#39;, Studia Troica, vol. 3, pp. 233–237.
Vidal-Naquet, P (1986). &#39;Athens and Atlantis: Structure and Meaning of a Platonic Myth&#39;, in P Vidal-Naquet, The Black Hunter, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, pp. 263–284. ISBN 0-8018-3251-9
Whitshaw, Elena Maria (1928, Reprint 1994), Atlantis in Spain ISBN 0-9328-1322-4
Wilson, Colin (1996). From Atlantis to the Sphinx ISBN 1-85227-526-X
Zangger, E (1993). The Flood from Heaven: Deciphering the Atlantis legend, New York: William Morrow and Company. ISBN 0-688-11350-8
Zhirov, Nikolai F., Atlantis&nbsp;– Atlantology: Basic Problems, Translated from the Russian by David Skvirsky, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1970
{{Refend}}
External links{{Commons category}}
{{Wiktionary}}

Ancient Atlantis Texts : Plato, Diodorus Siculus, et al.
Atlantis, at sacred-texts.com
New Findings on the Location of Atlantis
Sinking Atlantis - PBS


{{Continents of the world}}








{{Link FA}}
{{Link FA}}
{{Link FA}}
ar:???????
an:Atlantida
ast:Atlántida
az:Atlantida
be:?????????
bs:Atlantida
bg:?????????
ca:Atlàntida
cv:?????????
cs:Atlantida
da:Atlantis
de:Atlantis
et:Atlantis
el:?????????
es:Atlántida
eo:Atlantido
fa:????????
fr:Atlantide
fy:Atlantis
gd:Atlantis
gl:Atlántida
ko:?????
hr:Atlantida
id:Atlantis
ia:Atlantida
is:Atlantis
it:Atlantide
he:???????
ka:?????????
kk:?????????
ky:?????????
la:Atlantis insula
lv:Atlant?da
lt:Atlantida
hu:Atlantisz
mk:?????????
ml:?????????????
ms:Atlantis
mn:????????
nl:Atlantis (eiland)
nds-nl:Atlantis
ja:???????
frr:Atlantis
no:Atlantis
oc:Atlantida
pl:Atlantyda
pt:Atlântida
ro:Atlantida
ru:?????????
sq:Atlantida
simple:Atlantis
sk:Atlantída
sl:Atlantida
sr:?????????
sh:Atlantida
fi:Atlantis
sv:Atlantis
ta:???????????
th:?????????
tg:?????????
tr:Atlantis
uk:?????????
vi:Atlantis
vls:Atlantis
zh:?????