title{{Refimprove}}
{{Infobox national military}}
The Azerbaijani Armed Forces ({{lang-az}}) were re-established according to the Law of the Republic of Azerbaijan on the Armed Forces from 9 October 1991.official web page of the President of the Republic of Azerbaijan The Azerbaijan Democratic Republic (ADR) had originally formed its own armed forces from 26 June 1918.  However these were dissolved after Azerbaijan was absorbed into the Soviet Union as the  Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic from 28 April 1920. After the Soviet Union dissolved in 1991-92 the armed forces were reformed based on Soviet bases and equipment left on Azeri soil.The armed forces have three branches: the Azerbaijani Land Forces, the Azerbaijani Air and Air Defence Force, and the Azerbaijani Navy. Associated forces include the Azerbaijani National Guard, the Internal Troops of Azerbaijan, and the State Border Service, which can be involved in state defense under certain circumstances.According to the Azerbaijani media sources the military expenditures of Azerbaijan for 2009 were set at $2.46 billion USD,{{cite news}} however according to SIPRI, only $1.473 billion was spent in that year.Stockholm International Peace Research Institute The SIPRI Military Expenditure Database IISS also suggests that the defence budget in 2009 was $1.5 billion.{{cite book}} Azerbaijan has its own Defense Industry, which manufactures small arms. In the future, Azerbaijan hopes to start building tanks, armored vehicles, military planes and military helicopters.{{cite web}} and {{cite web}}{{cite web}} and {{cite web}}
OverviewSince the fall of the Soviet Union, Azerbaijan has been trying to further develop its armed forces into a professional, well trained, and mobile military. Azerbaijan has been undergoing extensive modernization and capacity expanding programs, with the military budget increasing from around $300 million in 2005 to $2.46 billion in 2009.{{cite news}} The total armed forces number 56,840 men in the land forces, 7,900 men in the air force and air defence force, and 2,200 men in the navy. There are also 19,500 personnel in the National Guard, State Border Service, and Internal Troops.C. W. Blandy Azerbaijan: Is War Over Nagornyy Karabakh a Realistic Option? Advanced Research and Assessment Group. Caucasus Series 08/17. — Defence Academy of the United Kingdom, 2008, p.12 In addition, there are 300,000 former service personnel who have had military service in the last 15 years.{{cite book}} The military hardware of Azerbaijan consists of 220 main battle tanks, an additional 162 T-80's were acquired between 2005 and 2010Azerbaijan is second big purchaser of tanks from Russia, Ukraine and Belarus in 2005-2010, 595 armored combat vehicles and 270 artillery systems. The air force has about 106 aircraft and 35 helicopters.{{cite book}} The IISS list 37 fighter aircraft, 15 fighter-ground attack aircraft, four transport aircraft, 50 training aircraft (including five combat capable trainers), 15 attack helicopters, and 20 transport helicopters Azerbaijan has acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear weapons state. Azerbaijan participates in NATO's Partnership for Peace. Azerbaijan joined the U.S.-led coalition against Iraq in 2003. It sent 150 troops to Iraq, and later troops to Kosovo. Azeri troops are still serving in Afghanistan.Despite the rise in Azerbaijan's defence budget, which now doubles Armenia's entire state budget,Blandy, 'Azerbaijan: Is War Over Nagornyy Karabakh a Realistic Option?, 2008, p.6, quoting http://nvo.ng.ru/wars/2007-02-09/2_poroh.html Nezavisimoye Voyennoye Obozreniye 9 February 2007. the armed forces wwere assessed in 2008 as not having a high state of battle readiness and being ill-prepared for wide scale combat operations.Blandy, 2008, p.7 However, August 2011 investigations shows that after purchase of S-300 surface to air missiles, the largest apparent gap in Azerbaijan's air defense system may have been filled.{{cite web}} Today 'National Hero of Azerbaijan' is the highest national title in the country, awarded for outstanding services of national importance to Azerbaijan in defense, as well as other deeds in other spheres.
History of Azerbaijan military{{Main}}
Azerbaijan Democratic Republic
The history of the modern Azerbaijan army dates back to Azerbaijan Democratic Republic in 1918, when the Armed Forces of Azerbaijan Republic were created on June 26, 1918. First de facto Minister of Defense of ADR was Dr. Khosrov bey Sultanov. When the Ministry was formally established Gen. Samedbey Mehmandarov became the minister, and then Lt-Gen. Ali-Agha Shikhlinski his deputy. Chiefs of Staff of ADR Army were Lt-Gen. Mamedbey Sulkevich (March 1919 - 10 December 1919) and Maj-Gen. Abdulhamid bey Gaitabashi (10 December 1919 – April 1920).Azerbaijani Army marks 91 yearsToday.Az - Azerbaijan marks Day of Armed ForcesThe Red Army invaded Azerbaijan on 28 April 1920. Although the bulk of the newly formed Azerbaijani army was engaged in putting down an Armenian revolt that had just broken out in Karabakh, the Azeris did not surrender their brief independence of 1918-20 quickly or easily. As many as 20,000 of the total 30,000 soldiers died resisting what was effectively a Russian reconquest.Hugh Pope, "Sons of the conquerors: the rise of the Turkic world", New York: The Overlook Press, 2006, p. 116, ISBN 1-58567-804-X The national Army of Azerbaijan was abolished by the Bolshevik government, 15 of the 21 army generals were executed by the Bolsheviks.

World War IIDuring World War II, Azerbaijan played a crucial role in the strategic energy policy of Soviet Union. Much of the Soviet Union's oil on the Eastern Front was supplied by Baku. By a decree of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR in February 1942, the commitment of more than 500 workers and employees of the oil industry of Azerbaijan was recognised with orders and medals.
Operation Edelweiss carried out by the German Wehrmacht targeted Baku because of the importance of its oil fields to the USSR.Swietochowski, Tadeusz(1995) Russia and Azerbaijan: A Borderland in Transition, Columbia University, p. 133.
Some 800,000 Azerbaijanis fought within the ranks of the Soviet Army of which 400,000 died. Azeri national formations of the Red Army included the 223rd, 227th, 396th, 402nd, and 416th Rifle Divisions. Azeri Major-General Azi Aslanov was awarded twice Hero of the Soviet Union.
Dissolution of the Soviet armed forcesDuring the Cold War, Azerbaijan had been the deployment area of units of the Soviet 4th Army whose principle formations included three motor rifle divisions (23rd, 60th, and 296th).  The 4th Army also included missile and air defense brigades and artillery and rocket regiments. The 75th Motor Rifle Division, part of the 7th Guards Army, was isolated in Nakhichevan. The 75th Division's stores and equipment were apparently transferred to the Nakhichevan authorities.See reference at 7th Guards Army article. Azerbaijan also hosted the 49th Arsenal of the Soviet Main Agency of Missiles and Artillery, which contained over 7,000 train-car loads of ammunition to the excess of one billion units.The first president of Azerbaijan, Ayaz Mutallibov, did not wish to build an independent army, wanting to rely instead largely on Soviet troops. Even when the Parliament decided that an army should be formed in September 1991, disagreements between the government and the opposition Azerbaijani Popular Front Party impeded creation of a unified force.International Crisis Group, Azerbaijan: Defence Sector Management and Reform Crisis Group Europe Briefing N°50, 29 October 2008, p.3 Around this time, the first unit of the new army was formed on the basis of the 18-110 military unit of mechanized infantry of the Soviet Ground Forces (probably part of the 4th Army) located in Shikhov, south of Baku.{{cite web}} {{Dead link}} At the time of the parliamentary decision, Lieutenant-General Valeh Barshadli became the first Minister of Defense of Azerbaijan, from September 5 to December 11, 1991.{{cite web}} Later from May to September 4, 1992 he served as Chief of General Staff of Azerbaijani Armed Forces.
In summer 1992, the nascent Defense Ministry received a resolution by the Azerbaijani president on the privatization of units and formations in Azerbaijani territory. It then forwarded an ultimatum to Moscow demanding control over vehicles and armaments of the 135th and 139th Motor Rifle Regiments of the 295th Motor Rifle Division.Vladimir Petrov, How South Caucasus was armed, Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies (Moscow, Russia) In July 1992, Azerbaijan ratified the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe (CFE), which establishes comprehensive limits on key categories of conventional military equipment. Azerbaijan approved the CFE flank agreement in May 1997.The transfer of the property of the 4th Army (except for part of the property of the 366th Motor Rifle Regiment of the 23rd Motor Rifle Division captured by Armenian armed formations in 1992 during the regiment's withdrawal from Stepanakert) and the 49th arsenal was completed in 1992. Thus, by the end of 1992, Azerbaijan received arms and military hardware sufficient for approximately four motor rifle divisions with prescribed army units. It also inherited naval ships. There are also reports that 50 combat aircraft from the disbanded 19th Army of the Soviet Air Defence Forces came under Azeri control.{{Citation needed}}
After Lt Gen Barshadli became Chief of General Staff, subsequent defense ministers from 1992 have included:

Maj.-Gen. Tajeddin Mehdiyev (December 1991 - January 1992)
Colonel Shahin Musayev (January–February 1992)
Interior Troops Colonel Tahir Aliyev (February–March 1992)
Rahim Gaziyev (March 1992-February 1993)
Maj.-Gen. Dadash Rzayev (February–June 1993)
Colonel Safar Abiyev (June–August 1993)
Maj.-Gen. Vahid Musayev (August–September 1993)
Maj. Gen. Mammadrafi Mammadov (September 1993 - February 1995)
Col.-Gen. Safar Abiyev (since 1995)

The Azeri armed forces took a series of devastating defeats by Armenian forces1993 UN Security Council Resolutions on Nagorno-Karabakh during the 1992–1994 Nagorno-Karabakh War, which resulted in the loss of control of Nagorno-Karabakh proper and seven surrounding rayons, comprising roughly 16%CIA World Factbook. Azerbaijan. 2008:"Azerbaijan has lost 16% of its territory and must support some 600,000 internally displaced persons as a result of the conflict." of the territory of Azerbaijan. Azerbaijani sources insist that Armenian victory was largely due to military help from Russia and the wealthy Armenian diaspora. Armenians partially deny the allegation, claiming that Russian side was equally supplying Armenian and Azerbaijani sides with weapons and mercenaries. During the war, the Azeri armed forces were also aided by Turkish military advisers, and Russian, Ukrainian, Chechen and Afghan mercenaries.
Land forces
The Azerbaijani Land Forces number 85,000 strong, according to UK Advanced Research and Assessment Group estimates. The 2,500 men of the National Guard are also part of the ground forces. In addition, there are 300,000 former service personnel who have had military service in the last 15 years. Other paramilitary agencies consist of Interior Ministry Internal Troops of Azerbaijan, 12,000 strong, and the land component of the State Border Service, 5,000 strong.Azerbaijan has signed numerous contracts to strengthen its armed forces and to train its military with Turkey's assistance. Over the last 15 years, Azerbaijan has been preparing its military for possible action against Armenian forces in Nagorno-Karabakh. Azerbaijan may attempt to retake Karabakh and the surrounding regions by force.
Organization
The Land Forces consist of five army corps:

1st Army Corps also known as Evlax Army Corps (concentrated near Ganja)
2nd Army Corps also known as Pirekeshkul Army Corps (concentrated against Armenian controlled territories and part is deployed on the Azerbaijan-Iranian border)
3rd Army Corps also known as Shamkir Army Corps (concentrated against Armenian controlled territories)
4th Army Corps also known as Baku Army Corps (covers Absheron and the coast)
5th Army Corps also known as Nakhchivan Army Corps (deployed in Nakhichevan)

The Land Forces include 23 motor rifle brigades, an artillery brigade, a multiple rocket launcher brigade, and an anti-tank regiment. The IISS Military Balance reported in 2007 that the Land Forces had an estimated 40 SA-13 Gopher, SA-4 Ganef, and SA-8 Gecko air defence missile systems, with '80-240 eff.' to support the army in the battlefield. (IISS 2007, p.&nbsp;157)The Peacekeeping forces of Azerbaijan are mostly supplied from the Land Forces, though the Internal Troops of Azerbaijan do also supply some. As of March 2011, 94 peacekeepers were deployed with the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan.http://www.isaf.nato.int/images/stories/File/Placemats/PLACEMAT.MARCH%2004..pdf In the past, it also actively supported the peacekeeping operation in Kosovo and Iraq.The Azeri peacekeeping unit deployed in Iraq consisted of 14 officers, 16 sergeants and 120 privates, a total of 150 troops. The unit secured the hydroelectric power station and reservoir in Al Haditha from August 2003. In December 2008, Azerbaijan withdrew the unit from Iraq.
Air forcesThe Azerbaijani Air and Air Defence Force is a single unified service branch.Jane's Sentinel Security Assessments - Russia and the CIS: Air Force, dated 18 June 2009, and {{cite journal}} Some 8,000 men serve in the air force and air defence force.The Azerbaijani Air and Air Defence Force has around 106 aircraft and 35 helicopters. The country has four major airbases. Nasosnaya Air Base has fighters, Kyurdamir Air Base a bomber regiment, Ganja Air Base transports, and Baku Kala Air Base the helicopter unit. There are also four other airbases which do not appear to have aircraft based there. These are Dollyar Air Base, Nakhichevan Airport, Sanqacal Air Base, and Sitalcay Air Base.The Azeri Air Force uses MiG-21, MiG-23, Su-24 and Su-25 aircraft, as well as the MiG-29 purchased from Ukraine in 2006 and Il-76 transport aircraft. The MiG-29 have been designated as the standard aircraft for the AzAF.Azerbaijan shows 4th generation MiG-29 multirole fighter jets. Azerbaijan is holding talks with either the People's Republic of China or Pakistan to purchase JF-17 Thunder aircraft.China supplies FC-1 multipurpose fighters to Azerbaijan MiG-25s previously in service have been retired seemingly in the 2007-09 period.Azerbaijan's helicopter force is concentrated at Baku Kala Air Base and according to the IISS consists of a single regiment with around 14-15 Mi-24, 12-13 Mi-8 and 7 Mi-2. Jane's Information Group and the IISS give figures which agree with only a single aircraft's difference.http://www8.brinkster.com/vad777/sng/azerb/azerb.htm Recently, end of 2010 Russian Rosvertol announced that Azerbaijan armed forces signed a deal for 24 pieces of Mi-35M (Hind-E) gunships what would further enhance the Azeri ground attack formations.http://www.defenseindustrydaily.com/Azerbaijan-Orders-24-Mi-35M-Helicopter-Gunships-06789/http://www.helihub.com/2011/02/25/azerbaijan-buys-24-mi-35m-attack-helicopters/The Air Force has L-29 and L-39 advanced training aircraft in store. The Azerbaijan Border Guard and Voluntary Society of Defense, Patriotism and Sport have Yakovlev light training aircraft.
Air defense
Azerbaijan has missile and radar systems intended to defend Azeri airspace. There are at least 2 divisions of S-300PMU2.Russian Defense Ministry Confirms Readiness to Sell S-300 to Azerbaijan. Thereby the country has one of the most capable SAM [surface-to-air missile] system in the region.IMINT & AnalysisRussia's Credibility And Its Military Sales To Azerbaijan Azerbaijan also operates two S-200 (SA-5 GAMMON) batteries near Baku and Mingachevir; the S-300PMU-2 represents a logical replacement for these systems offering coverage of the majority of the nation. The country also has about 100 NATO designated SA-2 Guideline (original name S-75), SA-3 Goa (S-125 Pechora-2M), and the SA-5 Gammon (S-200) are in static installations.IISS Military Balance 2007, p.&nbsp;158 These may be around Baku and the central part to cover the whole Azeri aerospace.  Also in Azerbaijan there is a former Soviet early warning radar. The Qabala Radar is a bistatic phased-array installation, currently operated by the Russian Space Forces under a contract until 2012. The contract was signed in 2002 and will expire in 2012 where it would be given back to the Azerbaijani government. The contract costs Russia $7 million per year. The radar station has a range of up to 6,000&nbsp;kilometres (3,728&nbsp;mi), and was designed to detect intercontinental ballistic missile launches as far as from the Indian Ocean. Whether the Russian Government shares any of the station's radar data with Azerbaijan is unknown.
Training and educationAzerbaijani pilots are trained in the Azerbaijan Air Force School and then developing their skills in operational units. Azerbaijan has an experience exchange with Turkey, Ukraine, the United States and a number of NATO countries. The Turkish Air Force School has a great role in the training of Azeri military pilots. Azerbaijani pilots are also trained in Ukraine’s Pilot Training School.Azerbaijan’s military aviation opportunities
Navy
The main naval base of the Soviet Union in the Caspian Sea was based in Baku. When the Soviet Union collapsed, Azerbaijan inherited the naval base and parts of the Caspian Fleet.{{cite web}} The Azerbaijan Navy has about 2,200 personnel.Jane's Fighting Ships, 2010, accessed February 2010. IISS 2007 attributes 2,000 personnel The navy has a Petya class light frigate, Qusar (G 121), and a number of patrol craft, including one Turk class, Araz, P 223, one Brya (Project 722) class, P 218, one Shelon (Project 1388M) class, P 212, one Poluchat class (Project 368), P 219, one Luga class (Project 888), T 710, and four Petrushka (Polish UK-3 class), P 213, P 214, P 215, and P 216. There are four minesweepers consisting of 2 Sonya class minesweeper and 2 Yevgenya class minesweepers. (Jane's Fighting Ships 2010)The Navy is also attributed with 5 landing craft, 3 Polnochny and 2 Vydra,(IISS 2007) plus three research ships, 1 Project 10470, A 671, ex Svyaga, 1 Balerian Uryvayev class survey vessel (AG) and one Vadim Popov class survey vessel (AG).The U.S. Navy has helped train the Azeri Navy. There is also an agreement to provide US support to refurbish Azeri warships in the Caspian Sea. In 2006, the US Government donated 3 motorboats to the Azerbaijani navy. In 2007 an agreement between Azeri Navy and a US military company was concluded, which stated that a part of the Azeri Navy would be equipped with advanced laser marksmanship systems. The US company specialists were also to give training on the use of the new equipment.Azeri Navy to be equipped with marksmanship system lasers A number of separate U.S. programmes are underway under the Caspian Guard Initiative, focused mostly on enhancing Azerbaijani and Kazakh maritime border security.In May 2011, President of the State Oil Company of Azerbaijan Republic Rovnag Abdullayev stated that Azerbaijan to start production of national warships after 2013.{{cite web}}{{cite web}}
Special forces
The Naval Intelligence of Azerbaijan maintains the 641st Special Warfare Naval Unit. The special forces were trained by the Navy Seals of the U.S.{{cite web}} and both special forces have participated in joint naval exercises, headquartered at the Azerbaijani Naval Station on the island of Wolf in the Bay of Baku.US trains and modernizes Azerbaijani Navy Unit 641 has several midget submarines such as Triton-1M and Triton 2 at their disposal as well as underwater tool motion for individual divers. The special unit is composed of 3 reconnaissance groups, 2 groups for mountainous warfare and one diving group. Obligatory training includes parachute jumping day and night, on land and on water.{{cite web}}There is also unconfirmed reports of a 'Tigers' special warfare unit. It is said that the 'Tigers' unit was established in cooperation with the Turkish Navy in 2001. The training and structure of the Tigers are similar to Turkish special forces, Su Alt? Taarruz and United States Special Forces who have close training relationships with them.U.S. foreign aid, Turkey's Akhtamar ploy, looking for intelligence in Azerbaijan The first Tiger units were established at Ganja following a joint training program with Turkey. The Special Forces are equipped with the Israeli IMI Tavor TAR-21.{{cite web}}
Defense industryThe Ministry of Defence Industry of Azerbaijan directs domestic military supplies for Azerbaijan. It was established in 2005. The Defence Industries Ministry subsumed the State Department for Military Industry and for Armaments and the Military Science Center, each of which was formerly a separate agency within the Azerbaijani Defense Ministry.The defense industry has emerged as an autonomous entity with a growing defense production capability. The ministry is cooperating with the defense sectors of Ukraine, Belarus and Pakistan.Azerbaijan Defense Industry Along with other contracts, Azerbaijani defence industries and Turkish companies, Azerbaijan will produce 40mm revolver grenade launchers, 107mm and 122mm MLRS systems, Cobra 4x4 vehicles and joint modernization of BTR vehicles in Baku.Azerbaijan, Turkey to produce revolver grenade launchersAzerbaijan’s Ministry of Defense Industry plans to assume several projects on technical modernization of Armed ForcesAzerbaijan, Turkey sign contract on joint rocket productionAzerbaijani Defense Industry Ministry conducts negotiations with Turkish “Otokar” Company on production of armored vehiclesThe major military companies of Azerbaijan are:

RPE Iglim, aviation and shipbuilding
Radiogurashdirma, communication means and radio-electronic
RPE Neftgazavtomat, devices and automation systems for monitoring technological processes
RPE Automatic Lines, non-standard equipment and products for application in electrotechnical and machine engineering
Avia-Agregat, multi-purpose aviation equipment, various airdrome conditioners, universal container of board conductor, air-to-air radiators, fuel-oil, air-to-air heat exchangers and ventilators Aircraft Repair Plant of Azerbaijan to be reconstructed

In early 2008, reports indicated that an agreement with Turkey had been signed which would lead to Azerbaijan producing armoured personnel carriers, infantry fighting vehicles, and small calibre artillery pieces.Azerbaijan manufacturing arms Another 2008 report mentioned Azerbaijan's desire to produce its own military aircraft and helicopters, but quoted a military expert as saying that it would be impossible to do so for the next five years.Topix.com, Uzeir Jafarov: "Azerbaijan will be unable to produce competitive military technique in the next five years" September 2008
International cooperationAzerbaijan cooperates with about 60 countries in the military-technical sphere and has an agreement on military-technical cooperation with more than 30 countries.Czech defense minister to visit Azerbaijan
Turkey
In December 2009 an agreement on military assistance was signed by Turkey and Azerbaijan. The agreement envisions Ankara’s supplying Azerbaijan with weapons, military equipment and, if necessary, soldiers in case war with Armenia over Karabakh resumes.Azeri lawmakers hail Turkey military aid accordTurkey has provided Azerbaijan with infantry weapons, tactical vehicles (jeeps, trucks, etc.) professional training, military organization, technology transfer, licenced military hardware production and other services. Due to help from Turkish specialists and instructors, thousands of Azerbaijani officers have been trained to western standards.NATO, Azerbaijani troops part of the KFOR familyThe military position as international importance of Azerbaijan increased with agreement between Azerbaijan and Turkey on the participation an Azerbaijani peacekeeping platoon in the staff of Turkish battalion in Kosovo.Azerbaijan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, List of the military documents signed between the Republic of Turkey and  Republic  of AzerbaijanSince 1992 Azerbaijan and Turkey have signed more than 100 military protocols, some of the major protocols include:List of the military documents signed between the Republic of Turkey and Republic of Azerbaijan

Cooperation of staff members
National security cooperation in the topographical area
Forming and training of profession school of forces kind of Baku
Carrying out of the material and technical purchasing
Military industry cooperation
Development of the 5th Army Corps also known as Nakhchivan Army Corps in NakhchivanIn 2001 between the Ministry of Defense of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the General Staff of the Republic of Turkey on development of Nakhchivan 5th army protocol
Cooperation in the area of military history, military archives and museum work and military publication
Assistance on training, material and technical between the Azerbaijan Border Guard and the Turkish Armed Forces.
Long-term economical and military cooperation and application of the financial aid
Application of material and technical provision

In May 2011, Azerbaijan had discussed the purchase of long-range rockets from two Chinese companies, the minister of the defence industry has said. Other arms deals were signed with Turkey. Turkish Defence Minister Vecdi Gonul and Yaver Jamalov signed a protocol of intent on future joint production of two types of output - 107-mm rockets and the national rifle, possibly the Mehmetçik-1. A protocol of intent was signed the same day with the Mechanical and Chemical Industry Corporation [MKEK] on the joint production of 120-mm mortar launchers. This project will come into force in a few months time. Agreement has also been reached with Turkish company Aselsan on the production of some types of defence output in Azerbaijan, specifically the latest types of weapons' sights. These projects will probably happen in the near future too.{{cite web}} Recently, Turkish defense industries secretariat told that an export version of the T-155 Firtina self propelled howitser is almost done and could start production. T-155 has been powered by a German MTU power pack, which restricts the sale to some countries like Azerbaijan. The Turkish manufacturer MKEK, has announced that they have found an alternate supplier for the power pack where Azerbaijan showed interest to buy the high tech, more capable 155mm 52 caliber from Turkish authorities.
United States
Section 907 of the United States Freedom Support Act bans any kind of direct United States aid to the Azerbaijani government. Despite this law there is extensive U.S. military cooperation with Azerbaijan. This has included Special Forces and naval aid, consultations with United States European Command, and linkages through the U.S. National Guard State Partnership Program.On 19 May 2006, Azerbaijani Defense Minister Safar Abiyev and the then commander of United States Air Forces in Europe General Tom Hobbins met in Baku to discuss military cooperation. He said the objective of his visit was to become familiar with the state of Azerbaijani armed forces.NATO & Azerbaijan relations Hobbins pointed to the progress made in the NATO-Azerbaijan relations, saying that the successful implementation of the NATO Partnership for Peace program in Azerbaijan has brought the country even closer to the alliance. He said that the two countries' air forces will expand cooperation.U.S. & Azerbaijani Air Force cooperationThe U.S. state of Oklahoma is linked with Azerbaijan through the U.S. National Guard State Partnership Program (SPP)). Oklahoma National Guard troops have been sent on training and humanitarian missions to Baku.
IsraelAzerbaijan and Israel cooperate on numerous areas of the defense industry. Azerbaijan has shown great interest in Israeli technology over the years. In particular, an agreement was reached over the construction of the factory of intelligence and combat drones in Azerbaijan.Israel rearms Azerbaijani army on PanARMENIAN.NetWashington briefing : Israel, Azerbaijan to step up military cooperationThe Israeli defense company Elta Systems Ltd has had cooperation from Azerbaijan in building the TecSAR reconnaissance satellite system, which can take high-definition photos of ground surfaces in all weather conditions.Azerbaijan Mum about Israeli Spy Plane, Satellite ProjectsNinan Koshy, "India and Israel Eye Iran", Foreign Policy in Focus, 13 February 2008. According to Azerbaijani military experts, the TecSAR system will be indispensable for military operations in  the mountainous terrains of Azerbaijan.As of June 2009, Israel and Azerbaijan had been negotiating on the production of Namer armoured infantry fighting vehicles in Azerbaijan.Panarmenian.net panarmenian > Israel rearms Azerbaijani army, 30 June 2009 There is no further information as to whether any agreement has been made.
NATO
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and Azerbaijan actively cooperate on defence institutional reforms and have developed practical cooperation in many other areas. Azerbaijan’s Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP) and its Partnership for Peace (PfP) linkages lay out the programme of cooperation between Azerbaijan and NATO.The Azerbaijani government has however delayed implementing IPAP-recommended reforms, however, in part at least because no decision has been taken to seek NATO membership. This is because Azerbaijan's foreign policy 'seeks to balance interests with the U.S., EU, Russia and Iran.'International Crisis Group, Azerbaijan: Defence Sector Reform and Management, Europe Briefing No.50, Baku/Tblisi/Brussels, 29 October 2008, p.1According to a NATO diplomatic source some key officials at NATO headquarters in Brussels were pushing hard for engaging Azerbaijan on the membership question. "Turkey, Romania, Italy, Poland, the United Kingdom and the Baltic states," are among the member-states also backing a fast track for Azerbaijan’s NATO membership.EurasiaNet.org - Eurasia insight - Azerbaijan: Baku can leapfrog over Ukraine, Georgia for NATO membershipIn 5 June 2006 the U.S. Departments of Defense and Homeland Security and the Federal Bureau of Investigation held a training program for about 100 representatives of the Ministry of Emergency Situations of Azerbaijan Republic, Republican Prosecutor's Office, Defense Ministry and other law-enforcement bodies. The objective of the training was to enhance Azerbaijan's ability to prevent the spread of weapon of mass destruction and related materials. According to a U.S. Embassy official, the program was organized as part of U.S. efforts to help Azerbaijan implement its NATO IPAP, specifically to strengthen Azerbaijan's ability to control its land and sea borders: "This training is being implemented within the frame of International struggle against spread of weapons of mass destruction. It is a good case that Azerbaijan is our active partner in struggle against spread of weapons of mass destruction".Partnership for Peace training and Military doctrine to be adoptedThere is also a limited amount of military cooperation with the other countries of GUAM: Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, and Moldova.??????? ?????????????? ????? ?????????????? ????????????? {{ru icon}}
See also

Azerbaijan Voluntary Military Patriotism Technical Sport Society


References{{Reflist}}

{{CIA World Factbook}}
{{StateDept}}


Further reading

U.S. Army War College Center for Strategic Leadership, Transformation of the Azerbaijani Armed Forces, October 2008


External links{{Commons category}}

Official YouTube Channel of Azerbaijani Soldier program

{{Azerbaijani Armed Forces}}
{{Asia in topic}}
{{Military of Europe}}
az:Az?rbaycan Silahl? Qüvv?l?ri
bs:Vojska Azerbejdžana
de:Az?rbaycan Silahl? Qüvv?l?ri
hy:????????? ?????? ?????
hr:Vojska Azerbejdžana
lt:Azerbaidžano ginkluotosios paj?gos
hu:Azerbajdzsán hadereje
ja:????????????
ru:???????????? ????? ????????????
simple:Azerbaijani Armed Forces
sr:?????? ???????????
sh:Vojska Azerbejdžana
tr:Azerbaycan Silahl? Kuvvetleri