title{{Refimprove}}
{{Politics of the European Union}}The Community acquisEuroVoc: Community acquis or acquis communautaire ({{IPAc-en}}; {{IPA-fr}}),{{cite web}} sometimes called the EU acquis, and often shortened to acquis, is the accumulated legislation, legal acts, and court decisions which constitute the body of European Union law. The term is French: acquis meaning "that which has been agreed upon", and communautaire meaning "of the community".
Chapters of the acquisDuring the process of the enlargement of the European Union, the acquis was divided into 31 chapters for the purpose of negotiation between the EU and the candidate member states for the fifth enlargement (the ten that joined in 2004 plus Romania and Bulgaria which joined in 2007). These chapters were:



Free movement of goods
Free movement of persons
Freedom to provide services
Free movement of capital
Company law
Competition policy
Agriculture
Fisheries
Transport policy
Taxation
Economic and Monetary Union
Statistics
Social policy and employment
Energy
Industrial policy
Small and medium-sized enterprises
 
Science and research
Education and training
Telecommunication and information technologies
Culture and audio-visual policy
Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments
Environment
Consumers and health protection
Cooperation in the field of Justice and Home Affairs
Customs union
External relations
Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP)
Financial control
Financial and budgetary provisions
Institutions
Others
 
For the negotiations with Croatia and Turkey, the acquis was split up into 35 chapters instead, with the purpose of better balancing between the chapters: dividing the most difficult ones into separate chapters for easier negotiation, uniting some easier chapters, moving some policies between chapters, as well as renaming a few of them in the process:



Free movement of goods
Freedom of movement for workers
Right of establishment and freedom to provide services
Free movement of capital
Public procurement
Company law
Intellectual property law
Competition policy
Financial services
Information society and media
Agriculture and rural development
Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy
Fisheries
Transport policy
Energy
Taxation
Economic and monetary policy
Statistics
 
Social policy and employment(including anti-discrimination and equal opportunities for women and men)
Enterprise and industrial policy
Trans-European networks
Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments
Judiciary and fundamental rights
Justice, freedom and security
Science and research
Education and culture
Environment
Consumer and health protection
Customs union
External relations
Foreign, security and defence policy
Financial control
Financial and budgetary provisions
Institutions
Other issues
 
Correspondence between chapters of the 5th and the 6th Enlargement:

5th Enlargement 6th Enlargement 
1. Free movement of goods 1. Free movement of goods  
7. Intellectual property law  
2. Free movement of persons 2. Freedom of movement for workers  
3. Right of establishment and freedom to provide services  
3. Freedom to provide services 3. Right of establishment and freedom to provide services  
9. Financial services  
4. Free movement of capital 4. Free movement of capital  
5. Company law 6. Company law  
6. Competition policy 8. Competition policy  
5. Public procurement  
7. Agriculture 11. Agriculture and rural development  
12. Food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy  
8. Fisheries 13. Fisheries  
9. Transport policy 14. Transport policy  
21. Trans-European networks (one half of it)  
10. Taxation 16. Taxation  
11. Economic and Monetary Union 17. Economic and monetary policy  
12. Statistics 18. Statistics  
13. Social policy and employment
19. Social policy and employment(including anti-discrimination and equal opportunities for women and men)&nbsp; 
14. Energy 15. Energy  
21. Trans-European networks (one half of it)  
15. Industrial policy 20. Enterprise and industrial policy  
16. Small and medium-sized enterprises  
17. Science and research 25. Science and research  
18. Education and training 26. Education and culture10. Information society and media  
19. Telecommunication and information technologies  
20. Culture and audio-visual policy  
21. Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments 22. Regional policy and coordination of structural instruments  
22. Environment 27. Environment  
23. Consumer and health protection 28. Consumer and health protection  
24. Cooperation in the field of Justice and Home Affairs 23. Judiciary and fundamental rights  
24. Justice, freedom and security  
25. Customs union 29. Customs union  
26. External relations 30. External relations  
27. Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) 31. Foreign, security and defence policy  
28. Financial control 32. Financial control  
29. Financial and budgetary provisions 33. Financial and budgetary provisions  
30. Institutions 34. Institutions  
31. Others 35. Other issues  
Such negotiations usually involved agreeing transitional periods before new member states needed to implement the laws of the European Union fully and before they and their citizens acquired full rights under the acquis.
Other uses of the word acquisThe term acquis is also used to describe laws adopted under the Schengen Agreement, prior to its integration into the European Union legal order by the Treaty of Amsterdam, in which case one speaks of the Schengen acquis.The term acquis has been borrowed by the World Trade Organization Appellate Body, in the case Japan &ndash; Taxes on Alcoholic Beverages, to refer to the accumulation of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and WTO law ("acquis gattien"), though this usage is not well established.It has been used to describe the achievements of the Council of Europe (an international organisation unconnected with the European Union):Section 12, Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe Resolution 1290

The Council of Europe’s acquis in standard setting activities in the fields of democracy, the rule of law and fundamental human rights and freedoms should be considered as milestones towards the great European political project, and the European Court of Human Rights should be recognised as the pre-eminent judicial pillar of any future architecture.

It has also been applied to the body of "principles, norms and commitments" of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE):Intervention by Ambassador Aleksi Härkönen, Permanent Representative of Finland to the OSCE, Annual Security Review Conference.

Another question under debate has been how the Partners and others could implement the OSCE acquis, in other words its principles, norms and commitments on a voluntary basis.

The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) introduced the concept of the OECD Acquis in its "Strategy for enlargement and outreach", May 2004.
See also

Official Journal of the European Union
European Union law


References{{reflist}}
External links{{wiktionary}}

EUR-Lex: European Union Law.
JRC-Acquis, Aligned multilingual parallel corpus: 23,000 Acquis-related texts per language, available in 22 languages. Total size: 1 Billion words.
Translation Memory of the EU-Acquis: Up to 1 Million translation units each, for 231 language pairs.

{{Legislation of the European Union}}
{{European Union topics}}{{DEFAULTSORT:Acquis Communautaire}}

ca:Cabal comunitari
cs:Acquis communautaire
de:Acquis communautaire
es:Acervo comunitario
fr:Acquis communautaire
hr:Pravna ste?evina Europske unije
it:Acquis comunitario
hu:Acquis communautaire
nl:Gemeenschapsrecht
ja:??????????
pl:Acquis communautaire
pt:Acervo comunitário
ro:Acquis comunitar
sv:Gemenskapens regelverk
tr:Avrupa Birli?i müktesebat?
uk:??????? ?????????