titleConservation-restoration, also referred to as conservation, is a profession devoted to the preservation of cultural heritage for the future. Conservation activities include examination, documentation, treatment, and preventive care. All of this work is supported by research and education.
Definition
The traditional definition of the role of the conservator involves the examination, conservation, and preservation of cultural heritage using "any methods that prove effective in keeping that property in as close to its original condition as possible for as long as possible."Walston, S. 1978. p.9 The Preservation and Conservation of Aboriginal and Pacific Cultural Material in Australian Museums. ICCM Bulletin Vol 4 no. 1. December 1978. Institute for the Conservation of Cultural Materials (Inc).However, today the definition of the role of conservation has widened and would more accurately be described as that of ethical stewardship.The conservator applies some simple ethical guidelines, such as:

Minimal intervention.
Appropriate materials and methods that aim to be reversible to reduce possible problems with future treatment, investigation, and use.
Full documentation of all work undertaken.

In order for the conservator to apply their professional expertise accordingly, they must take into account the views of the stakeholder, the values and meaning of the object, and the physical needs of the material, in order to decide upon an appropriate conservation strategy.
History
Key dates{{main}}The tradition of conservation in Europe some consider to have begun in 1565 with the restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes.
Brief historyThe care for cultural patrimony has a long history within traditions of fixing and mending objects,Pye, E, 2001. Caring for the Past: Issues in Conservation for Archaeology and Museums. London: James and James and in individual restorations of artworks. During the 19th century, the fields of science and art became increasingly intertwined as scientists such as Michael Faraday began to study the damaging effects of the environment to works of art. Louis Pasteur carried out scientific analysis on paint during this time period as well.Stoner, Joyce Hill. 2005. p. 41.  “Changing Approaches in Art Conservation: 1925 to the present” in  (Sackler NAS Colloquium) Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and Analysis.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=11413&page=41 However, perhaps the first organised attempt to conserve cultural patrimony was the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings in the UK, influenced by the writings of John Ruskin the society was founded by William Morris and Philip Webb in 1877. During the same period a movement with similar aims had also developed in France under the direction of Eugène Viollet-le-Duc a French architect and theorist, famous for his "restorations" of medieval buildings.
Conservation, as a distinct field of study, initially developed in Germany, when in 1888 Friedrich Rathgen became the first chemist to be employed by a Museum, the Koniglichen Museen, Berlin (Royal Museums of Berlin). He not only developed a scientific approach to the care of objects in the collections, but disseminated this approach publishing a "Handbook of Conservation" in 1898.Gilberg, Mark. (1987) Friedrich Rathgen: The Father of Modern Archaeological Conservation. Journal of the American Institute for Conservation, Vol. 26, No. 2 (Autumn, 1987), pp. 105-120 http://cool.conservation-us.org/coolaic/jaic/articles/jaic26-02-004_2.html The early development of conservation in any area of the world is usually linked to the creation of positions for chemists within museums. However in the United Kingdom, pioneering research into painting materials and conservation, ceramics, and stone conservation was conducted by Arthur Pillans Laurie, academic chemist and Principal of Heriot Watt University from 1900. Laurie's interests were fostered by William Holman Hunt.{{cite web}} In 1924 in the UK the chemist Harold Plenderleith began to work at the British Museum with Dr. Alexander Scott in the newly created Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, thus giving birth to the conservation profession in the UK.http://www.britishmuseum.org/the_museum/departments/conservation_and_science/history.aspx This department had been created by the museum to address objects in the collection that had begun to rapidly deteriorate as a result of being stored in the London Underground tunnels during the First World War. The development of this department at the British Museum moved the focus for the development of conservation from Germany to Britain, and in 1956 Plenderleith wrote a significant handbook called The Conservation of Antiquities and Works of Art, it was this book rather than Rathgen's that is commonly seen as the major source for the development of conservation as we know it today.In the United States, the development of conservation can be traced to the Fogg Art Museum, and Edward Waldo Forbes, the Director of the Fogg from 1909 to 1944. He encouraged technical investigation, and was Chairman of the Advisory Committee for the first technical journal, Technical Studies, in the Field of the Fine Arts, published by the Fogg from 1932 to 1942. Importantly he also brought onto the museum staff chemists. Rutherford John Gettens was the first chemist in the U. S. to be permanently employed by an art museum. He worked with George L. Stout, the founder and first editor of Technical Studies. Gettens and Stout co-authored Painting Materials: A Short Encyclopaedia, first published in 1942 and reprinted in 1966. This compendium is still cited regularly. Only a few dates and descriptions in Gettens' and Stout's book are now outdated.Stoner, Joyce Hill. "Changing Approaches in Art Conservation: 1925 to the present". The publication exists in two editions. The earlier one is "Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques on Conservation and Analysis" and was published by the National Academy of Sciences in 2003. The later edition of the publication is "Arthur M. Sackler Colloquia: Scientific Examination of Art: Modern Techniques in Conservation and Analysis". It was published by the National Academies Press in 2005.George T. Oliver, of Oliver Brothers Fine art Restoration and Conservation
(Est. 1850 in New York City) invented the vacuum hot table for relining paintings in 1920’s, he filed a patent for the table in 1937.U.S. Patent# 2,073,802 :"Art of Oil Painting Restoration"- March 16, 1937 Taylor's prototype table, which he designed and constructed, is still in operation.The focus of conservation development then accelerated in Britain and America, and it was in Britain that the first International Conservation Organisations developed. The International Institute for Conservation of Historic and Artistic Works (IIC) was incorporated under British law in 1950 as "a permanent organization to co-ordinate and improve the knowledge, methods, and working standards needed to protect and preserve precious materials of all kinds." The rapid growth of conservation professional organizations, publications, journals, newsletters, both internationally and in localities, has spearheaded the development of the conservation profession, both practically and theoretically. Art historians and theorists such as Cesare Brandi have also played a significant role in developing conservation-restoration theory. In recent years ethical concerns have been at the forefront of developments in conservation. Most significantly has been the idea of Preventive conservation. This concept is based in part on the pioneering work by Garry Thomson CBE, and his book the Museum Environment, first published in 1978.Museum Environment (2nd Edition), 1986, by Garry Thomson CBE ISBN 978-0-7506-2041-3 Thomson was associated with the National Gallery (London), it was here that he established a set of guidelines or environmental controls for the best conditions in which objects could be stored and displayed within the Museum Environment. Although his exact guidelines are no longer rigidly followed they did inspire this field of conservation.
EthicsThe conservator's work is guided by ethical standards. These take the form of applied ethics. Ethical standards have been established across the world, and national and international ethical guidelines have been written. One such example is:

American Institute for Conservation Code of Ethics and Guidelines for Practice http://www.conservation-us.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=page.viewpage&pageid=858

Conservation OnLine's Ethical issues in conservation provides a number of articles on ethical issues in conservation; example of codes of ethics and guidelines for professional conduct in conservation and allied fields; and charters and treaties pertaining to ethical issues involving the preservation of cultural property.
Specialization within the profession


The profession of conservation-restoration is broad and encompasses many areas of speciality. Specialities may include:

Architectural conservation
Historic paint analysis 
Book and paper conservation
Conservation science
Electronic media conservation
Digital preservation
Film preservation
Media preservation
Phonograph record preservation
Frame conservation
Furniture conservation
Ivory conservation
Horological conservation
Metals conservation
Natural science conservation
Object conservation (archaeological, ethnographic, and sculptural)
Paintings conservation
Photograph conservation
Preventive conservation
Stained glass conservation
Textile conservation
Variable art conservation


Caring for cultural heritage
Preventive conservation{{Main article}}
Many cultural works are sensitive to environmental conditions such as temperature, humidity and exposure to light and ultraviolet light. They must be protected in a controlled environment where such variables are maintained within a range of damage-limiting levels. Shielding from sunlight of artifacts such as watercolour paintings for example is usually necessary to prevent fading of pigments.Preventive conservation is an important element of museum policy and collections care. It is an essential responsibility of members of the museum profession to create and maintain a protective environment for the collections in their care, whether in store, on display, or in transit. A museum should carefully monitor the condition of collections to determine when an artifact requires conservation work and the services of a qualified conservator.
Interventive conservation
Interventive Conservation refers to any act by a conservator that involves a direct interaction between the conservator and the cultural material. These interventive treatments could involve cleaning, stabilizing, repair, or even replacement of parts of the original object. It is essential that the conservator should fully justify any such work. Complete documentation of the work; carried out before, during, and after the treatment rules out chances of later doubts.The principal goal of a conservator is to nullify or at least reduce the rate of deterioration of an object, this can be achieved through either non-interventive or interventive methodologies. Interventive methodologies include all those actions taken by the conservator to directly intervene with the material fabric of the object. Such actions include surface cleaning such as varnish removal, or consolidation such as securing flaking paint. Such interventive actions are carried out for a variety of reasons including; aesthetic choices, Stabilization needs for structural integrity, or for cultural requirements for intangible continuity.One of the guiding principles of conservation has traditionally been the idea of reversibility, that is that all interventions with the object should be fully reversible, and the object should be able to be returned to the state in which it was prior to the conservators intervention. Although this concept remains a guiding principle of the profession, it is a concept that has been widely critiqued within the conservation profession Andrew Oddy and Sara Carroll (eds). 1999. Reversibility - Does it Exist? British Museum Occasional Paper Number 135. London: British Museum. and is now considered by many to be "a fuzzy concept".p. 185. Muñoz-Viñas, Salvador. 2005. Contemporary Theory of Conservation. London: Elsevier/Butterworth Heinemann. Another important principle of conservation is that all alterations should be well documented and should be clearly distinguishable from the original object.ICOM-CC International Council of Museums Committee for Conservation]An example of a highly publicized interventive conservation effort would be the conservation work conducted on the Sistine Chapel.
The conservation laboratory
Conservators routinely use chemical and scientific analysis for the examination and treatment of cultural works. The modern conservation lab uses equipment such as microscopes, spectrometers, and x-ray machines to better understand objects and their components. The data thus collected helps in deciding the conservation treatments to be provided to the object.
Country by country look
United StatesHeritage Preservation, in partnership with the Institute of Museum and Library Services, a U.S. federal agency, produced The Heritage Health Index. The results of this work was the report A Public Trust at Risk: The Heritage Health Index Report on the State of America's Collections, which was published in December 2005 and concluded that immediate action is needed to prevent the loss of 190 million artifacts that are in need of conservation treatment. The report made four recommendations:

Institutions must give priority to providing safe conditions for the collections they hold in trust.
Every collecting institution must develop an emergency plan to protect its collections and train staff to carry it out.
Every institution must assign responsibility for caring for collections to members of its staff.
Individuals at all levels of government and in the private sector must assume responsibility for providing the support that will allow these collections to surviveHeritage Health Index


United KingdomIn October 2006, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, a governmental department, authored a document: "Understanding the Future: Priorities for England's Museums".http://www.culture.gov.uk/images/consultations/cons_uf_prioritiesforenglandsmuseums.pdf This document was based on several years of consultation aimed to lay out the government's priorities for museums in the 21st century.The document listed the following as priorities for the next decade:

Museums will fulfil their potential as learning resources (pp 7–10).
Museums will be embedded into the delivery of education in every school in the country.
Understanding of the effectiveness of museum education will be improved further and best practice built into education programmes.
The value of museums&#39; collections as a research resource will be well understood and better links built between the academic community and museums.
Museums will embrace their role in fostering, exploring, celebrating and questioning the identities of diverse communities (pp 11–14).
The sector needs to work with partners in academia and beyond to create an intellectual framework supporting museums&#39; capacity to tackle issues of identity.
The museum sector must continue to develop improved practical techniques for engaging communities of all sorts.
Museums&#39; collections will be more dynamic and better used (pp 15–18).
Government and the sector will find new ways to encourage museums to collect actively and strategically, especially the record of contemporary society.
The sector will develop new collaborative approaches to sharing and developing collections and related expertise.
Museums&#39; workforces will be dynamic, highly skilled and representative (pp 17–22).
Museums&#39; governing bodies and workforces will be representative of the communities they serve.
Find more varied ways for a broader range of skills to come into museums.
Improve continuing professional development.
Museums will work more closely with each other and partners outside the sector (pp 23–26).
A consistent evidence base of the contribution of all kinds of museums to the full range of public service agendas will be developed.
There will be deeper and longer lasting partnerships between the national museums and a broader range of regional partners.
Museums&#39; international roles will be strengthened to improve museum programmes in this country and Britain&#39;s image, reputation and relationships abroad.

The conservation profession response to this report was on the whole less than favourable, the Institute of Conservation (ICON) published their response under the title "A Failure of Vision".http://www.icon.org.uk/images/stories/icon_understanding_the_future.pdf It had the following to say:{{quote}}{{quote}}Concluding: {{quote}}Further to this the ICON website summary reporthttp://www.icon.org.uk/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=400&Itemid=15 lists the following specific recommendations:

A national survey to find out what the public want from museums, what motivates them to visit them and what makes for a rewarding visit.
A review of survey results and prioritisation of the various intrinsic, instrumental and institutional values to provide a clear basis for a 10-year strategy
HR consultants to be brought in from the commercial sector to review recruitment, career development and working practices in the national and regional museums.
A commitment to examine the potential for using Museum Accreditation as a more effective driver for improving recruitment, diversity, and career development across the sector.
DCMS to take full account of the eventual findings of the current Commons Select Committee enquiry into Care of Collections in the final version of this document
The adoption of those recommendations of the recent House of Lords enquiry into Science and Heritage which have a potential impact on the future of museums.

In November 2008, the UK based think tank Demos published an influential pamphlet entitled 'It's a material world: caring for the public realm',Holden, John. and Samuel Jones. 2008. It's A Material World: Caring for the public realm. London: Demos. http://demos.co.uk/files/Material%20World%20-%20web.pdf in which they argue for integrating the public directly into efforts to conserve material culture, particularly that which is in the public, their argument, as stated on page 16, demonstrates their belief that society can benefit from conservation as a paradigm as well as a profession:{{quote}}
Training{{main}}
Training in conservation for many years took the form of an apprenticeship, whereby an apprentice slowly developed the necessary skills to undertake their job. For some specializations within conservation this is still the case. However, it is more common in the field of conservation today that the training required to become a practicing conservator comes from a recognized university course in conservation.AIC - Becoming a ConservatorThe University can rarely provide all the necessary training in first hand experience that an apprenticeship can, and therefore in addition to graduate level training the profession also tends towards encouraging conservation students to spend time as an intern.Conservation is an Interdisciplinary field as conservators have backgrounds in the fine arts, sciences (including chemistry, biology, and materials science), and closely related disciplines, such as art history, archaeology, studio art, and anthropology. They also have design, fabrication, artistic, and other special skills necessary for the practical application of that knowledge.Within the various schools that teach conservation, the approach differs according to the educational and vocational system within the country, and the focus of the school itself. This is acknowledged by the American Institute for Conservation who advise "Specific admission requirements differ and potential candidates are encouraged to contact the programs directly for details on prerequisites, application procedures, and program curriculum".AIC - Becoming a Conservator
Art selectionDue to the large quantities of artwork in modern times, there have debates as to whether all art is actually worth preserving.{{cite journal}}
Associations and professional organizations{{main}}
Societies devoted to the care of cultural heritage have been in existence around the world for many years. One early example is the founding in 1877 of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings in Britain to protect the built heritage, this society continues to be active today.SPAB: History of the SPABThe built heritage was also at the forefront of the growth of member based organizations in the United States for example, founded in 1889, the Richmond, Virginia-based Preservation Virginia (formerly known as the Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities) was the United States' first statewide historic preservation group. In 2003, it changed its name to reflect its wider focus in statewide preservation issues.APVA Preservation VirginiaToday, professional conservators join and take part in the activities of numerous conservation associations and professional organizations with the wider conservation field, and within their area of specialization.These organizations exist to "support the conservation professionals who preserve our cultural heritage".About AIC - OverviewThis involves upholding professional standards, promoting research and publications, providing educational opportunities, and fostering the exchange of knowledge among conservators, allied professionals, and the public.
International cultural heritage documents

Year Document Sponsor Text (English where available) 
1931 Athens Charter International Congress of Architects and Technicians of Historic Monuments text 
1931 Carta Di Atene Conferenza Internazionale di Atene text (Italian) 
1932 Carta Italiana del restauro Consiglio Superiore Per Le Antichità e Belle Arti text (Italian) 
1933 Charter of Athens IV CIAM text 
1956 New Delhi Recommendation IX UNESCO text, text 
1962 Paris Recommendation XII UNESCO text 
1964 Venice Charter II International Congress of Architects and Technicians of Historic Monuments text, text 
1964 Paris Recommendation XIII UNESCO text 
1967 Norms of Quito OAS text (Spanish), text 
1968 Paris Recommendation XV UNESCO text 
1972 Paris Convention XVII UNESCO text 
1972 Paris Recommendation XVII UNESCO text 
1972 Carta Italiana del Restauro  text (Italian) 
1972 Stockholm Declaration UNEP text 
1974 Santo Domingo Resolution, Dominican Republic Interamerican Seminar on the Conservation and Restoration of the Architectural Heritage of the Colonial and Republican Periods - OAS text (Portuguese), text (Portuguese) 
1975 Declaration of Amsterdam Congress on the European Architectural Heritage text 
1975 European Charter of the Architectural Heritage Council of Europe text 
1976 Charter on Cultural Tourism, Brussels International Seminar on Contemporary Tourism and Humanism text 
1976 Nairobi Recommendation XIX UNESCO text 
1977 Machu Picchu Charter  text (Portuguese), text (Portuguese), text (Spanish), ref (Spanish) 
1981 Burra Charter ICOMOS text 
1982 Florence Charter ICOMOS: Historic Gardens text, text 
1982 Nairobi Declaration UNEP text 
1982 Tlaxcala Declaration ICOMOS text 
1982 México Declaration World Conference on Cultural Policies - MONDIACULT text, text 
1983 Declaration of Rome ICOMOS text 
1987 Carta della conservazione e del restauro degli oggetti d&#39;arte e di cultura  text (Italian) 
1987 Washington Charter ICOMOS text, text 
1989 Paris Recommendation XXV UNESCO text 
1990 Lausanne Charter ICOMOS / ICAHM text, text 
1994 Nara Document UNESCO / ICCROM / ICOMOS text, text 
1995 European Recommendation Council of Europe, Committee of Ministers text (Rec(95)3E),
text (Rec(95)9E) 
1996 Declaration of San Antonio ICOMOS text 
1997 Declaration of Sofia XI ICOMOS or XXIX UNESCO text 
1997 Carta de Mar del Plata Mercosul text (Portuguese), text (Portuguese), text (Spanish), text (Spanish) 
2000 Cracow Charter  text (Italian) 
2002 Declaration of Cartagena de Indias, Colômbia Conselho Andino, OAS text 
2003 Paris Recommendation XXXII UNESCO text 

External listsExternal lists of international cultural heritage documents:

at ICOMOS - ICOMOS Charters and other Standards
at ICOMOS - Charters Adopted by the General Assembly of ICONOS



at UNESCO - Official documents
at UNESCO - Normative Action
at UNESCO - Legal instruments



at UN - UN Documents Cooperation Circles - Gathering a Body of Global Agreements



at The J. Paul Getty Trust - Conservation Institute - Cultural Heritage Policy Documents
at Fletcher School, Tufts University - Cultural Protection Treaties and Other International Agreements
at Robert Gordon University - Documents on cultural heritage protection
at Cultural Heritage.net - Codes-Charters-Declarations
by JK Gillon - CULTURAL HERITAGE CHARTERS AND STANDARDS



at Cuba Arqueológica - Cartas Internacionales de Protección del Patrimonio (Spanish)
at IPHAN - Relação das Cartas Patrimoniais (Portuguese)


Further reading

Charola, A. Elena, and Robert J. Koestler, eds. Pesticide Mitigation in Museum Collections: Science in Conservation: Proceedings from the MCI Workshop Series. Smithsonian Contributions to Museum Conservation, no. 1. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press, 2010. Copies of this volume are available for free pdf download from the Smithsonian&#39;s digital library by clicking on the included link.


See also

Values (heritage)


References{{Reflist}}
External links{{commons category}}
General resources

BCIN, the Bibliographic Database of the Conservation Information Network
CAMEO: Conservation and Art Materials Encyclopedia OnLine
Conservation OnLine (CoOL) Resources for Conservation Professionals, &#34;CoOL, an online resource operated by the Foundation of the American Institute for Conservation is a full text library of conservation information, covering a wide spectrum of topics of interest to those involved with the conservation of library, archives and museum materials. It is a growing online resource for conservators, collection care specialists, and other conservation professionals.&#34;
Centre for Cultural Materials Conservation, a Department of Melbourne University.
DOCAM — Documentation and Conservation of the Media Arts Heritage &#34;to address the issues of preserving and documenting digital, technological and electronic works of art.&#34;
Integrated Pest Management Working Group Website
International Council of Museums (ICOM) Code of Ethics for Museums, 2006
museumkids/What is Art Conservation? - The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2001.
Research Resources at the Getty Conservation Institute, including the AATA (formerly &#34;Art and Archaeology Technical Abstracts&#34;) search engine, bibliographies for various topics, cultural heritage policy documents, and links to other conservation-related Web sites.
Caring for Heritage Collections Online Course. An online course in preventive conservation issues for museum professionals, University of Melbourne, School of Historical Studies: Centre for Cultural Materials Conservation.
Centre de recherche et de restauration des Musées de France, C2RMF on Wikipedia {{fr icon}}
Theory and practice of conservation http://academic.reed.edu/art/faculty/rhyne/pubs.html#theory.


Scholarly journals

Journal of the American Institute for Conservation
ICOM-CC Ethnographic Newsletter
Victoria and Albert Museum Conservation Journal
Journal of Conservation and Museum Studies
Tate Papers
Getty Conservation Institute Newsletter
The Book and Paper Group - American Institute for Conservation
The Abbey Newsletter
e-Preservation Science journal
e-conservation magazine
CeROArt. on-line magazine devoted to a multidisciplinary approach to questions of Conservation, exposition, Restoration of Objets d’Art
Studies in Conservation
Reviews in Conservation
Journal of the Institute of Conservation
The Paper Conservator
Future Anterior. Journal of Historic Preservation, History, Theory, and Criticism, GSAPP, Columbia University


Relation to the public

UPenn's Architectural Conservation Lab
You be the Conservator
Lunder Conservation Center
Conservation Advice Notes - Portable Antiquities Scheme
Objects Conservation — Provided by the Division of Anthropology, American Museum of Natural History.
Conservation Report on Mukul Dey Archives by C. B. Gupta
Public Art Restoration Services
Freeview Video 'Science and Fine Art' by David Bomford of the National Gallery.  A Royal Institution Lecture showing how scientific techniques aid conservation by the Vega Science Trust.
New York Academy of Science Podcast about Ad Reinhardt's Black Painting and its restoration
Preserv'Art - Interactive database of products used in conservation by the CCQ
Agents of Deterioration - a Game from Liverpool Museum


Conservators in private practice that provide resources

Animation Art Conservation discusses the preservation of animation art and has many interviews with animation artists that detail their original intent and frequently how they made their art.
Conrad Schmitt Studios has been conserving artwork for buildings of architectural, historic, and religious significance since 1889.
EverGreene Architectural Arts, Inc. specializes in conservation and restoration practices globally.
Oliver Brothers Fine Art Restoration and Conservation, Boston-New York has been restoring and conserving paintings, works on paper, icons, murals, sculpture, gilded objects, and antique and contemporary picture frames since 1850.

{{DEFAULTSORT:Conservation-Restoration}}



{{link FA}}be:???????????
be-x-old:???????????
ca:Conservació i restauració
cs:Restaurování
da:Restaurering
de:Restaurierung
et:Restaureerimine
es:Conservación y restauración
fr:Restauration (art)
hr:Konzervacija-restauracija
it:Restauro
he:???????? (?????)
hu:Restaurálás (festészet)
nl:Restauratie (kunst)
no:Restaurering
nn:Restaurering
pl:Restauracja (architektura)
pt:Conservação e restauro
ru:???????????
sr:????????????
sh:Konzervacija-restauracija
sv:Restaurering
uk:??????????? (?????????)