title{{automatic taxobox}}Dasyproctidae is a family of large South American rodents, comprising the agoutis and acouchis.{{MSW3 Hystricognathi}} Their fur is a reddish or dark colour above, with a paler underside. They are herbivorous, often feeding on ripe fruit that falls from trees. They live in burrows, and, like squirrels, will bury some of their food for later use.{{cite book}}
ClassificationFossil taxa follow McKenna and Bell (1997), with modifications following Kramarz (2005).

Family Dasyproctidae
Genus †Alloiomys
Genus †Australoprocta
Genus †Branisamys
Genus †Incamys
Genus †Neoreomys
Genus †Megastus
Genus †Palmiramys
Genus Dasyprocta
Azara's Agouti, Dasyprocta azarae
Coiban Agouti, Dasyprocta coibae
Crested Agouti, Dasyprocta cristata
Black Agouti, Dasyprocta fuliginosa
Orinoco Agouti, Dasyprocta guamara
Kalinowski Agouti, Dasyprocta kalinowskii
Brazilian Agouti, Dasyprocta leporina
Mexican Agouti, Dasyprocta mexicana
Black-rumped Agouti, Dasyprocta prymnolopha
Central American Agouti, Dasyprocta punctata
Ruatan Island Agouti, Dasyprocta ruatanica
Genus Myoprocta
Green Acouchi, Myoprocta pratti
Red Acouchi, Myoprocta acouchy

The pacas (genus Cuniculus) are placed by some authorities (Woods, 1993;McKenna and Bell, 1997) in the Dasyproctidae, but molecular studies have demonstrated that they do not form a monophyletic group (Rowe and Honeycutt, 2002).
References{{reflist}}

Kramarz, A.G. 2005. A primitive cephalomyid hystricognath rodent from the early Miocene of northern Patagonia, Argentina. Acta Palaeontologica Polonica 50(2):249-258. PDF fulltext
McKenna, Malcolm C., and Bell, Susan K. 1997. Classification of Mammals Above the Species Level. Columbia University Press, New York, 631 pp. ISBN 0-231-11013-8
Rowe, D. L. and R. L. Honeycutt.  2002. Phylogenetic relationships, ecological correlates, and molecular evolution within the Cavioidea (Mammalia, Rodentia).  Molecular Biology and Evolution, 19:263-277.
Woods, C. A. 1993. Hystricognathi.  In Mammal Species of the World a Taxonomic and Geographic Reference. D. E. Wilson and D. M. Reeder eds. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington D.C.


{{Rodents}}
{{Dasyproctidae nav}}
br:Dasyproctidae
ca:Dasipròctid
de:Agutis und Acouchis
es:Dasyproctidae
fr:Dasyproctidae
lt:Agutiniai
hu:Agutifélék
nl:Agoeti's en acouchi's
pl:Agutiowate
pt:Dasyproctidae
ru:?????????
fi:Agutit
sv:Guldharar
th:?????????????????
uk:????????