titleThe following is a list of current and past notable artificial intelligence projects.
Specialized projects
Brain simulation

Blue Brain Project, an attempt to create a synthetic brain by reverse-engineering the mammalian brain down to the molecular level.
HNeT (Holographic Neural Technology), a technology by AND Corporation (Artificial Neural Devices) based on non linear phase coherence/decoherence principles.
Hierarchical Temporal Memory, a technology by Numenta to capture and replicate the properties of the neocortex.


Cognitive architectures

CALO, a DARPA-funded, 25-institution effort to integrate numerous artificial intelligence approaches (natural language processing, speech recognition, machine vision, probabilistic logic, planning, reasoning, numerous forms of machine learning) into an AI assistant that learns to help manage your office environment.
SHIAI (Semi Human Instinctive Artificial Intelligence), an AI methodology based on the use of semi-human instincts, developed at Islamic Azad University in 2004.
Virtual Woman, the oldest continuous form of virtual life — a chatterbot, virtual reality, artificial intelligence, video game, and virtual human.
OpenCog, an open-source framework for Artificial General Intelligence designed primarily to support a particular Cognitive Architecture known as CogPrime.
LIDA, a Java framework for Artificial General Intelligence developed at the University of Memphis, implementing a cognitive architecture based on Global Workspace Theory.


Games

Chinook, a computer program that plays English draughts; the first to win the world champion title in the competition against humans.
Deep Blue, a chess-playing computer developed by IBM which beat Garry Kasparov in 1997.
FreeHAL, a self-learning conversation simulator (Chatterbot) which uses semantic nets to organize its knowledge in order to imitate a very close human behavior within conversations.
Poki, research into computer poker by the University of Alberta.
TD-Gammon, a program that learned to play world-class backgammon partly by playing against itself (temporal difference learning with neural networks).


Knowledge and reasoning

Cyc, an attempt to assemble an ontology and database of everyday knowledge, enabling human-like reasoning.
Eurisko, a language by Douglas Lenat for solving problems which consists of heuristics, including heuristics for how to use and change its heuristics.
Mycin, an early medical expert system.
Open Mind Common Sense, a project based at the MIT Media Lab to build a large common sense knowledge base from online contributions.
P.A.N., a publicly available text analyzer.
Questsin, uses Query by Example and features a dictionary, knowledge base, repository, reference, and thesaurus.
Siri, a voice-based artificial intelligence program built into the IPhone 4s.
SNePS, a simultaneously a logic-based, frame-based, and network-based knowledge representation, reasoning, and acting system.
Watson, a question answering system being developed by IBM capable of playing the Jeopardy! gameshow.


Motion and manipulation

Cog, a robot developed by MIT to study theories of cognitive science and artificial intelligence, now discontinued.
Grand Challenge 5 – Architecture of Brain and Mind, a UK attempt to understand and model natural intelligence at various levels of abstraction, demonstrating results in a succession of increasingly sophisticated working robots.


Natural language processing

AIML, an XML dialect for creating natural language software agents.
A.L.I.C.E., an award-winning natural language processing chatterbot.
ELIZA, a famous 1966 computer program by Joseph Weizenbaum, which parodied person-centered therapy.
InfoTame, a text analysis search engine originally developed by the KGB for sorting  communications intercepts.
Jabberwacky, a chatterbot by Rollo Carpenter, aiming to simulate a natural human chat.
KAR-Talk, a chatterbot by I.-A.Industrie.
KAR Intelligent Computer, an artificial intelligence software included in the CEPC 230 KAR&#39;s computer from Continental Edison.
PARRY, another early famous chatterbot, written in 1972 by Kenneth Colby, attempting to simulate a paranoid schizophrenic.
Proverb, a system that can solve crossword puzzles better than most humans.Proverb: The probabilistic cruciverbalist (AAAI–99 Outstanding Paper Award). By Greg A. Keim, Noam Shazeer, Michael L. Littman, Sushant Agarwal, Catherine M. Cheves, Joseph Fitzgerald, Jason Grosland, Fan Jiang, Shannon Pollard, and Karl Weinmeister. 1999. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 710-717. Menlo Park, Calif.: AAAI Press.
SHRDLU, an early natural language processing computer program developed by Terry Winograd at MIT from 1968 to 1970.
START, the world&#39;s first web-based question answering system, developed at the MIT CSAIL.
SYSTRAN, a machine translation technology by a company of the same name, used by Yahoo!, AltaVista and Google, among others.
Texai, an open source project to create artificial intelligence, starting with a bootstrap English dialog system that intelligently acquires knowledge and behaviors.


Planning

O-Plan, a project to provide a modular and flexible planning and control system using AI, at AIAI, University of Edinburgh.


Other

Kreator, an optimization problem solving software by Intelligentics that uses A.I. techniques.
OpenAIR, a routing and communication protocol based on a publish-subscribe architecture, built especially for A.I. research.
SEAS (Synthetic Environment for Analysis and Simulations), a model of the real world used by Homeland security and the US Defense Department that uses simulation and AI to predict and evaluate future events and courses of action.The Register article Sentient world: war games on the grandest scale published 23 June 2007


Multipurpose projects
Software libraries

dANN,dANN Homepage a freely available AI library implemented in Java, implementing graph theory, ANN, GA, Markov Chains, graphical models (bayesian networks, HMM), etc.
ELKI,ELKI Homepage a research project and software framework with numerous data mining algorithms (in particular cluster analysis and outlier detection) and index structures by the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich.
FRDCSA,FRDCSA Homepage an attempt to package and integrate all FOSS AI systems for GNU+Linux-based systems.
I-X, a systems integration architecture project for the creation of intelligent systems at AIAI, University of Edinburgh.
RapidMiner, an environment for machine learning and data mining, developed by the Dortmund University of Technology.
Weka, a free implementation of numerous machine learning algorithms in Java.
Pogamut,Pogamut Homepage a free platform for Java AI development in games, developed by the Charles University in Prague


Cloud services

Data Applied, a web based data mining environment.



See also

Comparison of cognitive architectures
Progress in artificial intelligence


External links

SourceForge AI projects


References

{{DEFAULTSORT:List Of Artificial Intelligence Projects}}

