title{{Refimprove}}
{{Infobox character}}
Jane Marple, usually referred to as Miss Marple, is a fictional character appearing in twelve of Agatha Christie's crime novels and in twenty short stories. Miss Marple is an elderly spinster who lives in the village of St. Mary Mead and acts as an amateur detective. She is one of the most famous of Christie's characters and has been portrayed numerous times on screen. Her first appearance was in a short story published in The Sketch magazine in 1926, "The Tuesday Night Club",http://agathachristie.com/christies-work/detectives-and-sidekicks/miss-marple/ which later became the first chapter of The Thirteen Problems (1932). Her first appearance in a full-length novel was in The Murder at the Vicarage in 1930.
CharacterMiss Jane Marple is an elderly lady who lives in the little English village  St. Mary Mead. Superficially stereotypical, she is dressed neatly in tweed and is frequently seen knitting or pulling weeds in her garden.  Miss Marple sometimes comes across as confused or "fluffy", but when it comes to solving mysteries, she has a sharp logical mind, and an almost unmatched understanding of human nature with all its weaknesses, strengths, quirks and foibles. In the detective story tradition, she often embarrasses the local "professional" police by solving mysteries that have them stumped.Tape recordings Christie made in the mid 1960s reveal that 'Miss Marple' was partly based on Christie's grandmother."Agatha Christie used her grandmother as a model for Miss Marple, new tapes reveal", Stephen Adams, The Daily Telegraph, 16 September 2008. However, there is no definitive source for the derivation of the name 'Marple'."Was Miss Marple Born in cheshire?", Cheshire Life, accessed 30 March 2009. The most common explanation suggests that the name was taken from the railway station in Marple, Stockport, through which Christie passed, with the alternative account that Christie took it from the home of a Marple family who lived at Marple Hall, near her sister Madge's home at Abney Hall."Marple's Profile", Hercule Poirot Central, accessed 30 March 2009. Agatha Christie attributed the inspiration for the character of Miss Marple to a number of sources: Miss Marple was "the sort of old lady who would have been rather like some of my grandmother's Ealing cronies – old ladies whom I have met in so many villages where I have gone to stay as a girl".{{cite book}} p.449 Christie also used material from her fictional creation, spinster Caroline Sheppard, who appeared in The Murder of Roger Ackroyd.  When Michael Morton adapted Roger Ackroyd for the stage, he removed the character of Caroline replacing her with a young girl. This change saddened Christie and she determined to give old maids a voice: Miss Marple was born.The character of Jane Marple in the first Miss Marple book, The Murder at the Vicarage, is markedly different from how she appears in later books.  This early version of Miss Marple is a gleeful gossip and not an especially nice woman. The citizens of St. Mary Mead like her but are often tired by her nosy nature and how she seems to expect the worst of everyone. In later books she becomes more modern and a kinder person.Miss Marple never married and has no close living relatives.  Vicarage introduced Miss Marple's nephew, the "well-known author" Raymond West. His wife Joan (initially called Joyce), a modern artist, was introduced in 1933 in The Thirteen Problems. Raymond tends to be overconfident in himself and underestimates Miss Marple's mental powers. A niece named
Mabel, widow of the mysteriously dead Geoffrey Denham, stars in the 1927 short story "The Thumb Mark of Saint Peter." Miss Marple also employs young women from a nearby orphanage, whom she trains for "service" as general housemaids after the retirement of her long-time maid-housekeeper "faithful Florence." In her later years, Miss Marple has a live-in companion named Cherry Baker, who was first introduced in The Mirror Crack'd From Side To Side.Miss Marple is able to solve difficult crimes not only because of her shrewd intelligence, but because St. Mary Mead, over her lifetime, has given her seemingly infinite examples of the negative side of human nature. No crime can arise without reminding Miss Marple of some parallel incident in the history of her time.  Miss Marple's acquaintances are sometimes bored by her frequent analogies to people and events from St. Mary Mead, but these analogies often lead Miss Marple to a deeper realization about the true nature of a crime. Although she looks like a sweet, frail old woman, Miss Marple is not afraid of dead bodies and is not easily intimidated.  She also has a remarkable ability to latch onto a casual comment and connect it to the case at hand.Miss Marple has never worked for her living and is of independent means, although she benefits in her old age from the financial support of Raymond West, her nephew (A Caribbean Mystery,1964). She demonstrates a remarkably thorough education, including some art courses that involved study of human anatomy through the study of human cadavers. In They Do It with Mirrors (1952), it is revealed that, in her distant youth, Miss Marple spent time in Europe at a finishing school. She is not herself from the aristocracy or landed gentry, but is quite at home among them; Miss Marple would probably have been happy to describe herself as a gentlewoman. In They Do It With Mirrors (1952), it is mentioned that Miss Marple grew up in a cathedral close, and that she studied at an Italian finishing school with Americans Ruth Van Rydock and Caroline "Carrie" Louise Serrocold. (Ruth, prevailing on Miss Marple's long affection for them, arranges for Miss Marple to investigate Ruth's belief that Carrie Louise is in danger of her life.) Miss Marple may thus be considered a female version of that staple of British detective fiction, the gentleman detective. This education, history, and background are hinted at in the Margaret Rutherford films (see below), in which Miss Marple mentions her awards at marksmanship, fencing and equestrianism (although these hints are played for comedic value).Christie wrote a concluding novel to her Marple series, Sleeping Murder, in 1940. She locked it away in a bank vault so it would be safe should she be killed in the Blitz.  The novel was not published until shortly after Christie's death in 1976, some thirty-six years after it was originally written.While Miss Marple is described as 'an old lady' in many of the stories, her age is mentioned in "At Bertram's Hotel", where it is said she visited the hotel when she was 14 and almost 60 years have passed since then.  Excluding "Sleeping Murder", forty-one years passed between the first and last-written novels, and many characters grow and age. An example would be the Vicar's son. At the end of The Murder at the Vicarage, the Vicar's wife is pregnant. In The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side, it is mentioned that the son is now grown and successful and has a career. The effects of ageing are seen on Miss Marple, such as needing a vacation after illness in A Caribbean Mystery or finding in The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side that  because of poor eyesight she can no longer knit.
Novels featuring Miss Marple

The Murder at the Vicarage (1930)
The Body in the Library (1942)
The Moving Finger (1943)
A Murder is Announced (1950)
They Do It with Mirrors, or Murder with Mirrors (1952)
A Pocket Full of Rye (1953)
4.50 from Paddington, or What Mrs. McGillicuddy Saw! (1957)
The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side, or The Mirror Crack'd (1962)
A Caribbean Mystery (1964)
At Bertram's Hotel (1965)
Nemesis (1971)
Sleeping Murder (written around 1940, published 1976)


Miss Marple short story collections

&#34;The Tuesday Night Club&#34; (short story) featured Miss Marple for the first time ever. Written in 1927.
The Thirteen Problems (short story collection featuring Miss Marple, also published as The Tuesday Club Murders) (1932)
Miss Marple's Final Cases and Two Other Stories (short stories collected posthumously, also published as Miss Marple's Final Cases, but only six of the eight stories actually feature Miss Marple) (written between 1939 and 1954, published 1979)

Miss Marple also appears in Greenshaw's Folly, a short story traditionally included as part of the Poirot collection The Adventure of the Christmas Pudding (1960). Four stories in the Three Blind Mice collection (1950) feature Miss Marple: Strange Jest, Tape-Measure Murder, The Case of the Caretaker, and The Case of the Perfect Maid.
Books about Miss Marple

The Life and Times of Miss Jane Marple -- a biography by Anne Hart


Movies
Margaret RutherfordAlthough popular from her first appearance in 1930, Jane Marple had to wait thirty-two years for her first big-screen appearance.  When she made it, the results, starring Margaret Rutherford, were popular and successful light comedies, but were disappointing to Christie herself; nevertheless, Agatha Christie dedicated the novel The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side to Rutherford.Murder, She Said (1961, directed by George Pollock) was the first of four British MGM productions starring Rutherford. She presented the character as a bold and eccentric old lady, different from the prim and birdlike character Christie created in her novels.  This first film was based on the 1957 novel 4:50 from Paddington (U.S. title, What Mrs. McGillicuddy Saw!), and the changes made in the plot were typical of the series.  In the film, Mrs. McGillicuddy does not see anything because there is no Mrs. McGillicuddy.  Miss Marple herself sees an apparent murder committed on a train running alongside hers.  Likewise, it is Miss Marple herself who poses as a maid to find out the facts of the case, not a young friend of hers who has made a business of it. Joan Hickson played the part of the home help in this film and can claim to have appeared in two Miss Marple series.The other Rutherford films (all directed by George Pollock) were Murder at the Gallop (1963), based on the 1953 Hercule Poirot novel After the Funeral (In this film, she is identified as Miss JTV Marple, though there was no indication as to what the extra initials might stand for); Murder Most Foul (1964), based on the 1952 Poirot novel Mrs McGinty's Dead; and Murder Ahoy! (1964).  The last film is not based on any Christie work but displays a few plot elements from They Do It With Mirrors (viz., the ship is used as a reform school for wayward boys and one of the teachers uses them as a crime force), and there is a kind of salute to The Mousetrap.  Rutherford also appeared briefly as Miss Marple in the spoof Hercule Poirot adventure The Alphabet Murders (1965).The music to all four films was composed and conducted by Ron Goodwin and is still played on radio today.  The same theme is used on all four films with slight variations on each. The main theme has a distinct 1960s feel to it and is known to be a highly complex piece of music due to the quick playing of the Violin. The score was written within a couple of weeks by Goodwin who was approached by George Pollock after Pollock had heard about him from Stanley Black. Black had worked with Pollock on "Stranger in Town" in 1957 and years previously Stanley Black had used Ron Goodwin as his orchestrator.http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0006109/bioRutherford, who was 70 years old when the first film was made, insisted that she wear her own clothes during the filming of the movie, as well as having her real-life husband, Stringer Davis appear alongside her as the character 'Mr Stringer'.  The Rutherford films are frequently repeated on television in Germany, and in that country Miss Marple is generally identified with Rutherford's quirky portrayal.{{Citation needed}}
Angela LansburyIn 1980, Angela Lansbury played Miss Marple in The Mirror Crack'd (EMI, directed by Guy Hamilton), based on Christie's 1962 novel. The film featured an all-star cast that included Elizabeth Taylor, Rock Hudson, Geraldine Chaplin, Tony Curtis, and Kim Novak. Edward Fox appeared as Inspector Craddock, who did Miss Marple's legwork.  Lansbury's Marple was a crisp, intelligent woman who moved stiffly and spoke in clipped tones.  Unlike most incarnations of Miss Marple, this one smoked cigarettes.
Ita EverIn 1983, Estonian stage and film actress Ita Ever starred in the Russian language film adaptation of Agatha Christie's novel A Pocket Full of Rye (using the Russian edition's translated title, The Secret of the Blackbirds) as the character of Miss Marple.PBS Mystery. Miss Marple
Jennifer GarnerIn March 2011 it was reported that The Walt Disney Company had acquired the cinematic rights to the Miss Marple character, and was planning a contemporary adaptation to be set in the United States. 
{{cite news}} It was reported that Jennifer Garner would portray Miss Marple in the new franchise, and that Mark Frost had been hired to write the script for the first film.{{cite news}}
Television, stage and radio adaptations
TelevisionAmerican TV was the setting for the first dramatic portrayal of Miss Marple with Gracie Fields, the legendary British actress, playing her in a 1956 episode of Goodyear TV Playhouse based on A Murder Is Announced, the 1950 Christie novel.In 1970, the character of Miss Marple was portrayed by Inge Langen in a West German television adaptation of The Murder at the Vicarage  (Mord im Pfarrhaus).American stage and screen legend Helen Hayes portrayed Miss Marple in two American made-for-TV movies, both for CBS: A Caribbean Mystery (1983) and Murder with Mirrors (1984). Sue Grafton contributed to the screenplay of the former. Hayes's Marple was benign and chirpy.From 1984 to 1992, the BBC adapted all of the original Miss Marple novels as a series titled Miss Marple. Joan Hickson played the lead role. (Coincidentally, Hickson had played a housekeeper in the first film in which Margaret Rutherford played Miss Marple.) These programs, which are actually a set of 12 feature-length TV movies rather than a TV series in the usual sense, followed the plots of the original novels more closely than previous film and television adaptations had. Hickson has come to be regarded by many as the definitive Miss Marple (indeed Agatha Christie herself once remarked years earlier that she would like Joan Hickson to play Miss Marple).Haining, Peter. Agatha Christie - Murder in Four Acts (Page 140). 1990. Virgin Books. ISBN 1-85227-273-2Listing of the TV series featuring Joan Hickson:

The Body in the Library (1984)
The Moving Finger (1985)
A Murder is Announced (1985)
A Pocket Full of Rye (1985)
The Murder at the Vicarage (1986) - BAFTA nomination
Sleeping Murder (1987)
At Bertram's Hotel (1987), Isabella Parriss, playing the young Miss Marple.
Nemesis (1987) - BAFTA nomination
4.50 from Paddington (1987)
A Caribbean Mystery (1989)
They Do It With Mirrors (1991)
The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side (1992)

Angela Lansbury, who had played Miss Marple in the movie, The Mirror Crack'd, directed by Guy Hamilton, went on to star in the TV series Murder, She Wrote as Jessica Fletcher, a mystery novelist who also solves crimes. The character of Jessica Fletcher is thought{{By whom}} to be based on a combination of Miss Marple, Agatha Christie herself, and another Christie character, Ariadne Oliver, who often appears in the Hercule Poirot mysteries.Beginning in 2004, ITV broadcast a series of adaptations of Agatha Christie's books under the title Agatha Christie's Marple, usually referred to as Marple. Geraldine McEwan starred in the first three series. One other TV movie called "At Bertram's Hotel" (2007). Julia McKenzie took over the role in the fourth season. The adaptions are notable for changing the plots and characters of the original books (e.g., incorporating lesbian affairs, changing killer identities, re-naming or removing significant characters, and even using stories from other books in which Miss Marple did not originally feature).Listing of the TV series featuring Geraldine McEwan and Julia McKenzie:

The Body in the Library (2004)
The Murder at the Vicarage (2004)
4.50 from Paddington (2004)
A Murder is Announced (2005)
Sleeping Murder (2005)
The Moving Finger (2006)
By the Pricking of My Thumbs (2006)
The Sittaford Mystery (2006)
At Bertram's Hotel (2007) with Isabella Parriss, playing the young Marple.
Ordeal by Innocence (2007)
Towards Zero (2008)
Nemesis (2008)
A Pocket Full of Rye (2009)
Murder is Easy (2009)
They Do It with Mirrors (2009)
Why Didn't They Ask Evans? (2009)
The Mirror Crack'd from Side to Side (2010)
The Secret of Chimneys (2010)
The Blue Geranium (2010)
The Pale Horse (2010)

From 2004 to 2005, Japanese TV network NHK produced a 39 episode anime series titled Agatha Christie's Great Detectives Poirot and Marple, which features both Miss Marple and Hercule Poirot. Miss Marple's voice is provided by Kaoru Yachigusa.
StageIn 1974, Barbara Mullen played Miss Marple in Murder at the Vicarage at the Savoy Theatre, London.
In September 1977, veteran actress and authoress Dulcie Gray played the Miss Marple character in a stage adaptation of A Murder Is Announced at the Vaudeville Theatre in London, England{{Cite web}} that featured also Dinah Sheridan, Eleanor Summerfield, Patricia Brake and Barbara Flynn.Vaudeville Theatre programme, No.29 February 1978
RadioBBC Radio 4 dramatised all of the novels from 1993-2001 with June Whitfield as Miss Marple.{{Cite web}}

Title Show Episodes Episode Frequency Original airdate 
Murder At the Vicarage  5 Daily 26–30 December 1993 
A Pocket Full of Rye The Saturday Playhouse 1  11 February 1995 
At Bertram&#39;s Hotel  5 Daily 25–29 December 1995 
The 4:50 From Paddington The Saturday Playhouse 1  29 March 1997 
A Caribbean Mystery  5 Weekly 30 October  - 27 November 1997 
The Mirror Crack&#39;d From Side to Side Agatha Christie Special 1  29 August 1998 
Nemesis  5 Weekly 9 November - 7 December 1998 
The Body In the Library The Saturday Play 1  22 May 1999 
A Murder Is Announced  5 Weekly 9 August - 6 September 1999 
The Moving Finger The Saturday Play 1  5 May 2001 
They Do It With Mirrors  5 Weekly 23 July 2001 - 20 August 2001 
Sleeping Murder The Saturday Play 1  8 December 2001 

Other appearances
Marple was highlighted in volume 20 of the Case Closed manga's edition of "Gosho Aoyoma's Mystery Library", a section of the graphic novels (usually the last page) where the author introduces a different detective (or occasionally, a villain) from mystery literature, television, or other media.
See also{{portal}}

Miss Marple's Final Cases and Two Other Stories
List of female detective characters


References{{Reflist}}
External links

Miss Marple at the official Agatha Christie website
Biography of Miss Marple
{{imdb character}}
Yahoo Grouplist for Geraldine McEwan
Marion Shaw and Sabine Vanacker, "Reflecting on Miss Marple"
Marty S. Knepper, "Reading Agatha Christie's Miss Marple Series: The Thirteen Problems"

{{Miss Marple}}
{{Agatha Christie}}
{{Use dmy dates}}


{{Link FA}}ar:?????? ?????
bs:Gospo?ica Marple
cs:Jane Marplová
da:Miss Marple
de:Miss Marple
et:Miss Marple
es:Miss Marple
eo:Miss Marple
fa:???? ?????
fr:Miss Marple
ko:?? ??
hr:Miss Jane Marple
id:Miss Marple
it:Miss Marple
he:?'??? ?????
la:Ioanna Marple
hu:Miss Marple
mr:??? ??????
nl:Miss Marple
ja:???????
no:Miss Marple
nn:Miss Marple
pl:Jane Marple
pt:Miss Marple
ru:???? ?????
simple:Miss Marple
sl:Miss Marple
sr:????????? ?????
sh:Miss Marple
fi:Neiti Marple
sv:Miss Marple
tr:Miss Marple
uk:??? ?????
zh:?·??